






		
		
EPUB Accessibility 1.1
		

		
		
		
		
		
		

	









	
    
  
    EPUB Accessibility 1.1 Conformance and Discoverability Requirements for EPUB publications
    W3C Recommendation 17 October 2024
    
      More details about this document
      
        This version:
                https://www.w3.org/TR/2024/REC-epub-a11y-11-20241017/
              
        Latest published version:
                https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-a11y-11/
              
        Latest editor's draft:https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/
        History:
                    https://www.w3.org/standards/history/epub-a11y-11/
                  
                    Commit history
                  
        
        Implementation report:
                https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/reports/
              
        
        
        
        Editors:
    Matt Garrish (DAISY Consortium)
  
    George Kerscher (DAISY Consortium)
  
    Charles LaPierre (Benetech)
  
    Gregorio Pellegrino (Fondazione LIA)
  
    Avneesh Singh (DAISY Consortium)
  
        
        
        Feedback:
        GitHub w3c/epub-specs
        (pull requests,
        new issue,
        open issues)
      public-pm-wg@w3.org with subject line [epub-a11y-11] … message topic … (archives)
        Errata:https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/errata.html
        This document is also available in this non-normative format:
    EPUB 3
  
      
    
    
          See also
          
            translations.
        
    
    
	Copyright © 1999-2024
	International Digital Publishing Forum
	and
	World Wide Web Consortium. 
	W3C® 
	liability, 
	trademark and 
	permissive document license rules apply.

    
  
		
		Abstract
			This specification specifies content conformance requirements for verifying the accessibility of EPUB®
				Publications. It also specifies accessibility metadata requirements for the discoverability of EPUB
				publications.
		
		Status of This DocumentThis section describes the status of this
      document at the time of its publication. A list of current W3C
      publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found
      in the W3C technical reports index at
      https://www.w3.org/TR/.
    This document was published by the Publishing Maintenance Working Group as
    a Recommendation using the
        Recommendation track. 
  
      W3C recommends the wide deployment of this specification as a standard for
      the Web.
    
      A W3C Recommendation is a specification that, after extensive
      consensus-building, is endorsed by
      W3C and its Members, and
      has commitments from Working Group members to
      royalty-free licensing
      for implementations.
      Future updates to this Recommendation may incorporate
            new features.
    
    
        This document was produced by a group
        operating under the
        W3C Patent
          Policy.
      
    
                W3C maintains a
                public list of any patent disclosures
          made in connection with the deliverables of
          the group; that page also includes
          instructions for disclosing a patent. An individual who has actual
          knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains
          Essential Claim(s)
          must disclose the information in accordance with
          section 6 of the W3C Patent Policy.
        
  
                      This document is governed by the
                      03 November 2023 W3C Process Document.
                    Table of ContentsAbstractStatus of This Document1. Introduction1.1 Overview1.2 Success techniques1.2.1 Internationalization1.3 Application to older versions1.4 Terminology1.5 Conformance2. Discoverability2.1 Introduction2.2 Package metadata2.3 Linked metadata records3. Accessible publications3.1 Introduction3.2 Relationship to WCAG3.3 WCAG conformance3.3.1 WCAG conformance requirements3.3.2 Evaluating WCAG conformance3.3.2.1 Page and publication3.3.2.2 Applying the conformance criteria3.4 EPUB requirements3.4.1 Page navigation3.4.1.1 Overview3.4.1.2 Applicability3.4.1.3 Objectives3.4.1.3.1 Pagination source3.4.1.3.2 Page list3.4.1.3.3 Page breaks3.4.2 Synchronized text-audio playback3.4.2.1 Overview3.4.2.2 Applicability3.4.2.3 Objectives3.4.2.3.1 Completeness3.4.2.3.2 Reading order3.4.2.3.3 Skippability3.4.2.3.4 Escapability3.4.2.3.5 Navigation document3.5 Conformance reporting3.5.1 Introduction3.5.2 Publication conformance3.5.2.1 Other conformance claims3.5.3 Evaluator information3.5.3.1 Evaluator name3.5.3.2 Evaluation date3.5.3.3 Evaluator credentials3.5.3.4 Evaluator report3.5.4 Re-evaluating conformance4. Optimized publications5. Distribution6. Privacy and securityA. EPUB accessibility vocabularyA.1 OverviewA.1.1 About this vocabularyA.1.2 ReferencingA.1.3 Certifier propertiesA.1.3.1 certifiedByA.1.3.2 certifierCredentialA.1.3.3 certifierReportB. IndexB.1 Terms defined by this specificationB.2 Terms defined by referenceC. Change logD. AcknowledgementsE. ReferencesE.1 Normative referencesE.2 Informative references
		1. Introduction
			

			1.1 OverviewThis section is non-normative.
				

				This specification, EPUB Accessibility, addresses two key needs in the EPUB ecosystem:

				
					discoverability of the accessible qualities of EPUB publications; and
					evaluation and certification of accessible EPUB publications.
				

				The provision of accessibility metadata facilitates informed decisions about the usability of an EPUB
					publication. Consumers can review the qualities of the content and decide whether an EPUB
					publication is appropriate for their needs, regardless of whether it meets the bar of accessible
					certification. At a minimum, all EPUB publications that conform to this specification meet the
					accessibility metadata requirements described in 2. Discoverability.

				Although EPUB creators have always been
					able to create EPUB publications with a high degree of accessibility, this specification sets formal
					requirements for certifying content accessible. These requirements provide EPUB creators a clear set
					of guidelines to evaluate their content against and allows certification of quality. An accessible
					EPUB publication is one that meets the accessibility requirements described in 3. Accessible publications.

				The specification also discusses the practice of optimizing EPUB publications for specific reading
					modalities. In these cases, the content cannot meet the broad accessibility requirements of this
					specification, but by following its discoverability and reporting requirements EPUB creators can
					improve the ability of users to determine if the content still meets their needs. Refer to 4. Optimized publications for more information.

				The specification also addresses the impact of distribution on the accessibility and discoverability
					of content in 5. Distribution.

				This specification does not target a single version of EPUB. It is applicable to EPUB publications
					that conform to any version or profile, including future versions of the standard.

				Ideally, these guidelines help evaluate any digital publication built on Open Web Platform
					technologies, although ensuring such application is outside the scope of this specification.

				Note
					For additional background on the decisions that went into this specification, refer to EPUB Accessibility Frequently Asked
							Questions.
				
			

			1.2 Success techniquesThis section is non-normative.
				

				This specification takes an abstract approach to the accessibility requirements for EPUB publications, similar to how
					WCAG [wcag2] separates its accessibility guidelines from the techniques to achieve them. This
					approach allows the guidelines to remain stable even as the format evolves.

				To facilitate this approach, the companion EPUB Accessibility
						Techniques [epub-a11y-tech-11] document outlines conformance techniques. These techniques
					explain how to meet the requirements of this specification for different versions of EPUB.

				1.2.1 Internationalization
					

					This specification is also designed to address the accessibility needs of users independent of
						what languages they read. The same is true for the principles and success criteria defined in
						[wcag2]. The goal is to ensure that users can fully consume the information of a publication
						regardless of their preferred reading modality.

					At the same time, the language and writing conventions of the authored text will influence the
						techniques necessary to meet the accessibility requirements. EPUB requires support for Unicode text
						[epub-3], for example, which ensures the correct character data can be used (i.e., EPUB creators do not have to use
						images of text). Although this is an important feature, it is often not enough on its own to
						ensure that the text is fully accessible in any given language (e.g., additional information
						about directionality, emphasis, pronunciation, etc. may also be needed).

					As a consequence, there may be language- or culture-specific practices for meeting accessibility
						requirements. Whether these practices are defined within this specification and its techniques
						or elsewhere (e.g., in WCAG techniques or language-specific best practice recommendations) will
						depend on whether the issues are specific to EPUB or broadly affect all web content.
				
			

			1.3 Application to older versionsThis section is non-normative.
				

				This specification is applicable to any EPUB publication, even if the content conforms to an older version of EPUB that does not
					refer to this specification (e.g., EPUB 2 [opf-201]).

				Creators of such EPUB publications should create content in conformance with the accessibility and
					discoverability requirements of this specification. EPUB creators should also upgrade to the
					latest version of EPUB to get access to the most advanced accessibility features and techniques.

				Note that not all metadata expressions defined in this specification are supported in older version
					of EPUB. EPUB 2, in particular, does not support the refines attribute
					[epub-3]. If EPUB creators cannot avoid expressions that require this attribute, they will have to
					accept a certain amount of ambiguity in their statements (i.e., relationships between expression may
					only be apparent by their placement in the package document metadata).
			

			1.4 Terminology
				

				This specification uses terminology defined in
						EPUB 3 [epub-3].

				It also defines the following term:

				
					assistive
						technology
					
						This specification uses the definition of
								assistive technology from [wcag2].
						In the case of EPUB, an assistive technology is not always a separate application from a reading system. Reading
							systems often integrate features of standalone assistive technologies, such as
							text-to-speech playback.
					
				

				Note
					Only the first instance of a term in a section links to its definition.
				
			

			1.5 ConformanceAs well as sections marked as non-normative, all authoring guidelines, diagrams, examples, and notes in this specification are non-normative. Everything else in this specification is normative.
        The key words MAY, MUST, MUST NOT, OPTIONAL, SHOULD, and SHOULD NOT in this document
        are to be interpreted as described in
        BCP 14
        [RFC2119] [RFC8174]
        when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
      
		
		2. Discoverability
			

			2.1 IntroductionThis section is non-normative.
				

				Unlike web pages, EPUB creators distribute
						EPUB publications through many
					channels for personal consumption — a model that has made EPUB a successful format for ebooks and
					other types of digital publications. A consequence of this model, however, is that specific details
					about the accessibility of a publication must travel with it.

				An online bookstore aggregating content from publishers and authors, for example, does not know the
					production quality that went into each submission unless the publisher informs them through
					metadata.

				Ensuring that any interested party can discover the accessible qualities of an EPUB publication is
					therefore a primary concern. An EPUB publication can have more than one set of sufficient access modes depending on the alternatives provided to
					enable reading in another mode. For example, if alternative text and descriptions are provided for
					all the images in a publication, it would have both its default textual and visual sufficient access
					mode and a purely textual sufficient access mode.

				Similarly, content that does not meet the accessibility requirements of this specification does not
					necessarily fail to meet the needs of individual users.

				Only through the provision of rich metadata can a user decide if the content is suitable for
					them.
			

			2.2 Package metadata
				

				All EPUB publications MUST include
					[schema-org] accessibility metadata in the package document that exposes their
					accessible properties, regardless of whether the publications also meet the accessibility or optimization
					requirements.

				EPUB publications MUST include the following accessibility metadata:

				
					
						accessMode — a
							human sensory perceptual system or cognitive faculty necessary to process or perceive the
							content (e.g., textual, visual, auditory, tactile).
					

					
						accessibilityFeature — features and adaptations that contribute to the overall
							accessibility of the content (e.g., alternative text, extended descriptions, captions).
					

					
						accessibilityHazard — any potential hazards that the content presents (e.g.,
							flashing, motion simulation, sound).
					
				

				EPUB publications SHOULD include the following [schema-org] accessibility metadata:

				
					
						accessibilitySummary — a human-readable summary of the accessibility that
							complements, but does not duplicate, the other discoverability metadata. The summary also
							describes any known deficiencies (e.g., lack of extended descriptions, specific
							hazards).
					

					
						accessModeSufficient — a set of one or more access modes sufficient to consume the
							content without significant loss of information. An EPUB publication can have more than one
							set of sufficient access modes for its consumption depending on the types of content it
							includes (i.e., unlike access modes, this property
							takes into account any alternatives for content that is not broadly accessible, such as the
							inclusion of transcripts for audio content).
					
				

				EPUB creators MAY include additional
					[schema-org] accessibility metadata not specified in this section.

				Note
					This specification assumes that conformance and discoverability metadata will be processed and
						presented in a human-readable manner, removing the need for a summary unless there is additional
						information to express. Such processing is not available in all market segments, however,
						particularly in library systems. Publishers should consider this limitation when deciding
						whether to include a summary and what to state in it.
				

				Note
					For the complete list of approved terms to use with these properties, refer to the Schema.org Accessibility Properties
							for Discoverability Vocabulary [a11y-discov-vocab].
				

				Note
					See Discovery Metadata Techniques
						[epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on these properties and how to include them in
						different versions of EPUB. See also Include
							accessibility metadata in distribution records [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more
						information on including accessibility metadata in other formats.
				
			

			2.3 Linked metadata records
				

				Accessibility metadata can also be included in linked records [epub-3] (i.e., metadata records referenced from link
					elements), but the inclusion of such metadata solely in a linked record does not satisfy the
					discoverability requirements of this specification.
			
		
		3. Accessible publications
			

			3.1 IntroductionThis section is non-normative.
				

				EPUB builds on the Open Web Platform, with HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and SVG the core technologies used
					for content authoring. Leveraging these technologies allows EPUB creators to author EPUB publications with a high degree
					of accessibility through the application of established web accessibility techniques, such as using
					native elements and controls whenever possible and enhancing custom interactive content with
					[wai-aria] roles, states, and properties. Plus, whenever possible, the EPUB community adds
					publishing accessibility needs to these standards — for example, through the creation of the
					[dpub-aria-1.0] role module. It is not necessary for anyone familiar with web accessibility to
					learn a new accessibility framework to make EPUB publications accessible.

				The primary source for producing accessible web content is the W3C's Web Content Accessibility
					Guidelines (WCAG) [wcag2], which establish benchmarks for accessible content. WCAG defines four
					high-level content principles — that content be perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust.
					These principles are also central to creating accessible EPUB publications, so it is no surprise
					that this specification builds on the extensive work done in WCAG.

				This section defines how to apply the conformance criteria defined in
						WCAG to EPUB publications. It also adds additional requirements
						unique to EPUB publications, and defines conformance reporting
						requirements.

				EPUB publications authored to comply with the requirements in this section will have a high degree of
					accessibility for users with a wide variety of reading needs and preferences.
			

			3.2 Relationship to WCAGThis section is non-normative.
				

				WCAG [wcag2] and its associated techniques
					provide extensive coverage of issues and solutions for web content accessibility, covering
					everything from multimedia to interactive content to structured markup and more. They represent the
					foundation that this specification builds upon.

				This specification does not repeat the requirements or techniques introduced in those documents, as
					it risks breaking compatibility between the two standards (e.g., putting guidance out of sync, or in
					conflict). At the same time, although this specification does not call out those requirements, it
					does not diminish their importance in creating EPUB publications that are
					accessible.

				This specification instead defines how to apply WCAG to an EPUB publication — which is a collection of web documents as opposed to a single page — and
					adds an additional set of requirements. These requirements are no more
					or less important than those covered in WCAG; they are simply necessary to follow for EPUB
					publications. (Each requirement explains its relationship to WCAG in its respective section.)

				The same is true of the techniques in the EPUB Accessibility Techniques document
					[epub-a11y-tech-11]. It provides coverage of techniques that are unique to EPUB publications, or
					that need clarification in the context of an EPUB publication. It does not mean that the rest of the
					WCAG techniques are not applicable.

				As a result, although EPUB creators can
					read this section without deep knowledge of WCAG conformance, to implement the accessibility
					requirements of this specification requires an understanding of WCAG.

				Because this specification adds requirements that are not a part of WCAG, an EPUB publication can
					conform to WCAG without conforming to this specification.
			

			3.3 WCAG conformance
				

				3.3.1 WCAG conformance requirements
					

					To conform to this specification, an EPUB publication:

					
						
							MUST, at the minimum, meet the requirements of WCAG 2.0 [wcag20],
								but it is strongly recommended that it meet the requirements of the latest recommended version of WCAG 2.
						

						
							MUST, for whichever version of WCAG 2 selected, meet the requirements
								of Level A, but it is strongly recommended that it meet
								the requirements of Level AA.
							Note
								Although conforming at level AAA is not required by
									this specification, EPUB
										creators are encouraged to follow the practices detailed in AAA success
									criteria when producing accessible EPUB publications.
							
						
					

					The reporting flexibility offered by these requirements is to ensure that this specification can
						be adapted for use in regions that mandate accessibility but without negating or superseding the
						requirements in effect in those regions.

					This specification sets the baseline requirement to WCAG 2.0 Level A, for example, primarily to
						provide EPUB creators backwards compatibility for older content and flexibility to encourage
						adoption of accessible production where no formal requirements exist. Most accessibility
						practitioners do not recognize this level as providing a high degree of accessibility,
						however.

					Ideally, EPUB creators should try to conform to the latest version of WCAG 2 at Level AA, but
						local and national laws, or procurer or distributor requirements, will define the formal
						thresholds they must meet.

					Note
						Examples of legislative requirements for accessibility include the Directive
								2019/882 in the European Union and Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 in the United States. EPUB
							publications will need to meet more than just the basic Level A success criteria to be
							compliant with these laws.
					

					Keeping pace with WCAG has the benefit of continuously enhancing access for users. As web
						technologies change and improve, and awareness of conditions that impede access evolve, the
						standard adds new requirements. Meeting these additional requirements helps ensure EPUB
						publications employ the most up-to-date techniques. Meeting the requirements of older versions,
						while still helpful, can result in a less optimal reading experience.

					Similarly, legal frameworks and policies often cite Level AA conformance as the benchmark for
						accessibility. The reason is that it provides the greatest range of improvements that EPUB
						creators can realistically implement. When EPUB creators meet only Level A conformance, they
						compromise their content for various user groups, resulting in a less optimal reading
						experience.

					Note
						The W3C Accessibility Guidelines Working Group is
							currently developing WCAG 3. As this version potentially represents a significant departure
							from WCAG 2, a future version of this specification will address conformance requirements
							related to it. EPUB creators are encouraged to adopt WCAG 3 once it is stable and widely
							recognized, but conformance to the new version is not a requirement of this standard.
					
				

				3.3.2 Evaluating WCAG conformance
					

					3.3.2.1 Page and publication
						

						The WCAG principles [wcag2] focus on the
							evaluation of individual web pages, but an EPUB publication more
							closely resembles what WCAG refers to as a set of
								web pages: "[a] collection of web pages that share a common purpose" [wcag2].

						Consequently, when evaluating the accessibility of an EPUB publication, EPUB creators cannot review
							individual pages — or EPUB content documents, as they are known in EPUB 3 — in isolation.
							Rather, EPUB creators MUST evaluate their accessibility as part of the larger work.

						For example, it is not sufficient for EPUB creators to order the content within individual EPUB content documents
							if they list the documents in the wrong order in the spine. Likewise, including a title
							for every EPUB content document is complementary to providing a title for the publication:
							the overall accessibility decreases if either is missing.

						EPUB creators MUST evaluate the WCAG guidelines for content to be perceivable, operable,
							understandable, and robust against the full EPUB publication, not only against each EPUB
							content document within it.

						The EPUB Accessibility Techniques [epub-a11y-tech-11] provide more information about
							applying these guidelines to EPUB publications.
					

					3.3.2.2 Applying the conformance criteria
						

						When evaluating an EPUB
								publication, the WCAG conformance criteria
							[wcag2] are applied as follows:

						
							When determining compliance with a conformance level, the whole EPUB publication MUST
								meet the conformance requirements of the level claimed.

							EPUB creators MUST NOT use
								EPUB's fallback mechanisms to provide a conforming alternate version
								[wcag2], as there is no reliable way for users to access such fallbacks. If an EPUB
								creator uses fallbacks, both the primary content and its fallback(s) MUST meet the
								requirements for the conformance level claimed. EPUB-specific fallback mechanisms
								include manifest
									fallbacks [epub-3], bindings [epub-3] and content switching via the epub:switch
									element [epub-3].

							The "Full Pages" requirement [WCAG2] -- that parts of a
								page cannot be excluded when making a conformance claim -- applies to every EPUB content
									document in the EPUB publication (i.e., they must all conform in full to the
								conformance level claimed).
						
					
				
			

			3.4 EPUB requirements
				

				3.4.1 Page navigation
					

					3.4.1.1 OverviewThis section is non-normative.
						

						Statically paginated content is still ubiquitous, as print continues to be the most consumed
							medium for books both among the general reading public and in educational settings. Print is
							not the only source of static pagination, either: static page boundaries are also present in
							fixed-layout digital publications.

						As a result, non-visual readers face disadvantages relative to their peers in environments
							that use statically paginated content as they cannot easily locate the same locations in a
							publication (e.g., if a teacher instructs students to all turn to a specific page).

						The inclusion of page boundary locations helps bridge this disparity by ensuring the choice
							of reflowable media does not disadvantage those users.

						Providing page navigation also helps in reflowable publications that do not have a statically
							paginated equivalent. The default pagination of these publications by reading systems is not
							static since it changes depending on the viewport size and user's font settings. As a result, coordinating locations among
							users of the same EPUB
								publication can be complicated without static references.

						The inclusion of page navigation represents one method of achieving the Multiple Ways success criterion [wcag2], as it
							provides another meaningful way for users to access the content (e.g., in addition to the
							table of contents, linear reading order and any other navigation aids).

						Given the importance of page navigation in mixed print/digital environments, the requirement
							to include this feature has higher precedence than it would solely as one of many ways to
							meet the Multiple Ways success criterion.

						Note
							Refer to Page
									navigation [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on the inclusion of page
								navigation in EPUB publications.
						
					

					3.4.1.2 Applicability
						

						An EPUB publication SHOULD
							include page navigation whenever any of the following cases is true:

						
							the EPUB creator identifies
								the EPUB publication as the dynamically paginated equivalent of a statically paginated
								publication (e.g., included in a print/digital bundle);

							the EPUB creator offers the EPUB publication as an alternative to a statically paginated
								publication in an environment where they can reasonably predict the use of both versions
								(e.g., educational settings); or

							the EPUB creator generates the EPUB publication and a statically paginated publication
								from a workflow that allows the retention of page break locations across formats.
						

						EPUB creators MAY include page navigation in reflowable EPUB publications without statically
							paginated equivalents.

						When EPUB creators include page navigation, the objectives defined in this section apply to
							the EPUB publication.
					

					3.4.1.3 Objectives
						

						3.4.1.3.1 Pagination source
							

							
								Objective
								
									Identify the source of static page break locations.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									Users need to know the source of the pagination in an EPUB publication
										to determine whether it will be useful for their needs. Print publications, for
										example, produced in both hard and soft cover editions will have different
										pagination. Different editions of the same book often also have different
										pagination.
									Including a recognizable identifier for the statically paginated source, such as
										its ISBN or ISSN, ensures that users can determine which version the pagination
										corresponds to.
									If EPUB creators
										insert pagination as a navigation aid for digital-only publications, they must
										not specify a source (i.e., do not identify the current publication as the
										source of its own pagination).
								

								Meeting this Objective

								
									When an EPUB publication includes page break
											markers and/or a page list that correspond
										to a statically-paginated version of the publication, EPUB creators MUST
										identify that source in the package document
										metadata.
									Note
										Refer to Identifying the
												pagination source [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on
											meeting this objective.
									
								
							
						

						3.4.1.3.2 Page list
							

							
								Objective
								
									Provide navigation to static page break locations.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									The page list is the primary means of navigating to page break locations as it
										provides a list of links to each of the static page break locations in the EPUB
										publication.
									Reading systems
										typically use this list to generate a "go to page" interface in which users can
										plug in the page number that they wish to move to, but sometimes offer users the
										ability to access the full list and select the page number to go to.
									Without a page list, page navigation becomes extremely difficult as it would rely
										on navigating the individual page break markers
										(if they are even present).
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									An EPUB publication MUST include a page list.
									EPUB creators SHOULD
										include links to all pages of content reproduced from the source (i.e., they do
										not have to provide links for blank pages or content not reproduced in the
										digital edition).
									EPUB creators MUST include links to all page break
											markers in the content.
									EPUB creators should include links for all pages in the source whether they are
										reproduced or not, but this is not a requirement.
									Note
										Refer to Provide a page list
											[epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on meeting this objective.
									
								
							
						

						3.4.1.3.3 Page breaks
							

							
								Objective
								
									Provide static page break locations.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									Inserting page break markers into an EPUB publication
										provides users with context about where they are in the text. Assistive
											technologies can use this information to announce the current page
										number the user is on, for example, if the user wants to cite something on the
										page.
									The inclusion of page break markers can also allow users to move quickly forwards
										and backwards by page without having to access the page list each time.
									The inclusion of these markers also simplifies the creation of a page list, as they provide easily referenced
										destinations for the links.
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									Inclusion of page break markers in an EPUB publication is OPTIONAL.
									If an EPUB creator
										includes page break markers:
									
										they SHOULD include page break markers for all pages reproduced from the
											source (i.e., blank pages and content not reproduced in the digital edition
											do not require markers).
										they should include page break markers for all pages in the source (whether
											reproduced or not), but this is not a requirement.
									
									In addition, if page numbers are read aloud in a synchronized text-audio playback
										of the content (e.g., EPUB 3 media overlays [epub-3]), EPUB creators MUST
										identify the page numbers in the markup that controls the playback.
									Note
										Refer to Provide page break
												markers [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on meeting this
											objective.
									
								
							
						
					
				

				3.4.2 Synchronized text-audio playback
					

					3.4.2.1 OverviewThis section is non-normative.
						

						The provision of synchronized text-audio playback helps address various user needs. It not
							only enables a seamless visual and auditory reading experience from beginning to end of an
								EPUB publication, but is
							useful to users who only require audio playback (e.g., who cannot see the text or are
							prevented from reading visually due to motion-sickness) or who only benefit from reading
							with text highlighting (e.g., readers with dyslexia).

						Unlike purely linear listening experiences, EPUB with synchronized text-audio playback
							preserves the user's ability to navigate around the publication, such as via the table of
							contents, and also introduces audio-centric reading features like phrase navigation, and
							ways to control which parts of the content are read aloud.

						In order to offer users greater control over content presentation, EPUB creators need to add
							structure and semantics so that the reading system has the
							necessary context to enable this type of user experience. With greater context, a reading
							system can provide the ability to skip past secondary content that interferes with the
							primary narrative and escape users from deeply nested structures like tables.

						Adding structure and semantics to synchronized text-audio playback broadly falls under the
							objective of the Info and Relationships success
								criterion [wcag2]. Without structured and semantically meaningful playback
							sequences, the effect is to deprive users of rich navigation of the content.
					

					3.4.2.2 Applicability
						

						EPUB publications with
							synchronized text-audio playback MUST conform to all requirements in [epub-3]. It is not
							necessary to meet any additional requirements beyond those defined in [epub-3] to be
							conformant with this specification.

						To maximize the effectiveness of synchronized text-audio playback for people with different
							reading needs, however, EPUB
								creators are strongly encouraged to meet the OPTIONAL
								objectives defined in the next section.

						Note
							EPUB creators do not have to include synchronized text-audio playback in their EPUB
								publications, only ensure it conforms to these requirements when present.
						
					

					3.4.2.3 Objectives
						

						3.4.2.3.1 Completeness
							

							
								Objective
								
									Ensure that all text content is available in audio.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									Although it is possible for users who require a publication in audio form to use
										text-to-speech playback, the experience is considerably poorer than when
										pre-recorded narration is provided. Text-to-speech engines have limited built-in
										vocabularies, causing them to mangle and mispronounce most uncommon words they
										encounter. As a result users have to have words repeated and spelled out to make
										sense of the content, slowing down their reading and reducing comprehension.
									For this reason, it is important to provide narration for the full text of a
										publication in addition to the full text. Users can then decide which reading
										modality they prefer — text, audio, or a mix of the two.
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									EPUB creators MUST
										provide synchronized audio playback for all visible textual content as well as
										all textual alternatives for visual media.
									Note
										Refer to Ensuring complete
												text coverage [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on meeting
											this objective.
									
								
							
						

						3.4.2.3.2 Reading order
							

							
								Objective
								
									Ensure synchronized text-audio playback matches logical reading order.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									Every EPUB
											publication has a default reading order that allows users to progress
										through the content. The default reading order consists of two parts: the order
										of references in the spine provides a high-level progression through the EPUB content
											documents that make up the publication, while the markup within each
										EPUB content document provides the default progression through the content
										elements (i.e., as represented in the document object model [dom]).
									For many languages, the default reading order also matches the logical reading
										order — the way that users will naturally follow the narrative. It ensures
										that readers can follow the primary narrative and that they encounter secondary
										content where the author intended it to be read. The default reading order also
										establishes some less obvious relations, like the progress within a table from
										cell to cell and row to row.
									If the sequence of the synchronized text-audio playback does not match this
										progression, it can cause confusion for readers, whether they are only listening
										to the audio or trying to also follow visually.
									Ordering the playback to match the default reading order is the safest way to
										ensure that users can follow the text. In some cases, however, strict adherence
										to this practice can result in a suboptimal reading experience (e.g., playback
										of a table by column instead of row might make more natural sense in some
										cases). These publications have a logical reading order that cannot match the
										default order of the elements of the host format.
									The goal of this objective is not to forbid alternate presentations, but to
										ensure that deviations are only made to better represent the logical reading
										order of the content.
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									EPUB creators SHOULD
										order the synchronized text-audio playback instructions such that they reflect
										both:
									
										the order of the referenced EPUB content documents in the spine; and
										the order of each element within its respective EPUB content document.
									
									If EPUB creators use a different ordering, that ordering MUST still result in a
										logical playback of the content.
									Note
										Refer to Specifying the
												reading order [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on meeting
											this objective.
									
								
							
						

						3.4.2.3.3 Skippability
							

							
								Objective
								
									Enable users to automatically skip over content.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									Being able to read the primary narrative of a work without interruption is
										central to reading comprehension. EPUB creators
										typically structure EPUB publications to visually represent secondary information such as
										page break markers and footnotes outside the main narrative flow (e.g., by using
										different background colors or placement so readers can filter this information
										visually out while reading).
									Readers who prefer auditory playback, however, cannot skip this information with
										the same ease in a linear audio-based reading experience. And, without
										structural semantics, synchronized text-audio playback cannot offer skipping
										content either.
									When EPUB creators add structural semantics, however, reading
											systems can create reading experiences that allow users to decide which
										secondary content to skip by default during playback.
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									EPUB creators SHOULD identify all skippable structures.
									Note
										Refer to Identifying
												skippable structures [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on
											meeting this objective.
									
								
							
						

						3.4.2.3.4 Escapability
							

							
								Objective
								
									Enable users to automatically escape from structured content.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									When reading visually, users can quickly move through, and escape from, highly
										structured content such as sidebars, lists, and figures. Visual readers can skim
										lists and quickly return to the primary narrative once they locate the desired
										information, for example. The same is true for reading figures and sidebars, as
										they are visually offset from the primary narrative so easily jumped into and
										out of.
									The same ease of escaping from content is only possible if EPUB creators encode
										the structural semantics into the synchronized text/audio format. Users may not
										be able to escape from lists, sidebars, figures, and other highly structured
										content, unless EPUB creators encode the structural semantics of those
										elements.
									When EPUB creators provide this information, reading
											systems can simplify playback for auditory readers to enable a
										comparable reading experience.
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									EPUB creators SHOULD identify all escapable structures.
									Note
										Refer to Identifying
												escapable structures [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on
											meeting this objective.
									
								
							
						

						3.4.2.3.5 Navigation document
							

							
								Objective
								
									Ensure auditory playback is possible for the navigation aids in the EPUB
											navigation document when presented by reading
											systems.
								

								Understanding this Objective
								
									Reading systems typically provide their own interfaces to the navigation aids in
										the EPUB navigation document. For example, they open the table of contents as a
										specialized interface on top of the content the user is reading.
									To access these interfaces, users typically must rely on text-to-speech playback,
										when available, to hear the entries.
									Providing synchronized text-audio playback for the EPUB navigation document
										provides reading systems the ability to use auditory labels for the links,
										improving the experience for auditory readers.
								

								Meeting this Objective
								
									EPUB creators SHOULD
										provide synchronized text-audio playback for the EPUB navigation
											document [epub-3].
									Note
										Refer to Synchronizing the
												navigation document [epub-a11y-tech-11] for more information on
											meeting this objective.
									
								
							
						
					
				
			

			3.5 Conformance reporting
				

				3.5.1 IntroductionThis section is non-normative.
					

					Evaluators report the accessibility conformance of an EPUB publication through the
						expression of metadata properties in the package document.

					This metadata establishes both:

					
						the level of conformance achieved; and
						information about who performed the evaluation.
					

					The metadata uses a combination of properties from DCMI Metadata Terms [dcterms] and the EPUB Accessibility Vocabulary, as explained in more detail in the
						following sections.

					Although any individual or party can perform a conformance evaluation — provided they have
						the knowledge and tools to assess EPUB publications against the WCAG and EPUB requirements of this specification —
						users need to be able to trust that evaluations are performed in a comprehensive manner and that
						conformance claims are not influenced by self-interest in the outcome.

					To address this confidence issue, some regions designate a local authority responsible for all
						evaluations, in which case there is no flexibility in who can perform evaluations. Where such
						authorities do not exist, evaluators are encouraged to obtain and reference any applicable credentials to strengthen public confidence in their
						evaluations.

					Note
						As each metadata format is unique in what it can express, this specification does not mandate
							how to express conformance metadata outside of the EPUB package document.

						Ensuring consistency between internal and external accessibility metadata expressions is the
							responsibility of authors, publishers, and distributors. Refer to 5. Distribution for for a discussion of the effects of distribution on
							accessibility.
					
				

				3.5.2 Publication conformance
					

					To indicate conformance to the accessibility requirements of this specification, an EPUB publication [epub-3] MUST
						specify in its metadata section a conformsTo property [dcterms] whose value,
						after whitespace normalization [xml], exactly matches
						(i.e., both in case and spacing) the following pattern:

					EPUB Accessibility A11Y-VER - WCAG WCAG-VER Level WCAG-LVL

					where:

					
						A11Y-VER
						
							Specifies the version number of the EPUB Accessibility specification the publication
								conforms to. The value MUST be 1.1 or higher.
						
						WCAG-VER
						
							Specifies the version number of WCAG the publication conforms to. The value MUST be
									2.0 or higher.
						
						WCAG-LVL
						
							Specifies the WCAG conformance level the publication conforms to (e.g., A or
									AA).
						
					

					
    Example 1: A basic conformance statement
  
						In this example, the EPUB creator
							is stating that their publication conforms to the EPUB Accessibility 1.1 specification at
							WCAG 2.2 Level AA.

						<package …>
   <metadata …>
      …
      <meta 
          property="dcterms:conformsTo"
          id="conf">
         EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
      </meta>
      …
   </metadata>
   …
</package>
					

					The following conformance strings are valid as of publication of this specification:

					
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.0 Level A
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.0 Level AA
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.0 Level AAA
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.1 Level A
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.1 Level AA
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.1 Level AAA
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level A
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
						EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AAA
					

					Note
						The list of valid conformance strings will increase as W3C releases new versions of WCAG.

						In addition, WCAG 3.0 is set to introduce new
							level names (currently Bronze, Silver and Gold). Those names will likely replace A, AA, and
							AAA in the string pattern, but conformance will be addressed after that specification
							becomes a W3C
							Recommendation.
					

					3.5.2.1 Other conformance claimsThis section is non-normative.
						

						The requirement to include a dcterms:conformsTo identifier does not prevent EPUB
							publications from conforming to other standards, including other accessibility standards and
							guidelines (e.g., a specification that covers specific natural language issues). An EPUB
							publication can have multiple dcterms:conformsTo statements.

						For example, if an EPUB publication only meets WCAG conformance requirements (i.e., does not
							fully conform to this specification), EPUB creators can add a
								dcterms:conformsTo property with a conformance URL defined in the Required Components of a
								Conformance Claim [wcag2].

						Note
							As [wcag2] does not define how to specify the conformance level in the URL, EPUB
								creators will have to find an alternative means of relating this information when
								necessary (e.g., through the accessibility summary).
						

						Conversely, EPUB creators might need to indicate that an EPUB publication does not meet any
							accessibility standards (e.g., in order to claim an exemption). In these cases, they can use
							a dcterms:conformsTo property with value "none".

						Note
							For more information about claiming exemptions, refer to The EPUB Accessibility
										exemption property [epub-a11y-exemption].
						
					
				

				3.5.3 Evaluator information
					

					3.5.3.1 Evaluator name
						

						The package document metadata
							MUST include an a11y:certifiedBy property that specifies the name of the party that
							evaluated the EPUB
								publication.

						Note
							If an organization evaluates an EPUB publication, users will typically want to know the
								name of that organization. This specification discourages including the name of the
								individual(s) who carried out the assessment instead of the name of the organization, as
								this can diminish the trust users have in the claim.
						

						
    Example 2: An EPUB publication evaluated by the publisher
  
							In this example, the publisher is stating they self-evaluated the EPUB publication (the
								values of the dc:publisher and a11y:certifiedBy property are
								the same).

							<metadata …>
  …
  <dc:publisher>
     Acme Publishing Inc.
  </dc:publisher>
  …
  <meta
      property="dcterms:conformsTo"
      id="conf">
     EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
  </meta>
  
  <meta
      property="a11y:certifiedBy"
      refines="#conf">
     Acme Publishing Inc.
  </meta>
  …
</metadata>
						

						
    Example 3: An EPUB publication evaluated by a third-party
  
							In this example, a third party has evaluated the EPUB 3 publication (the values of the
									dc:publisher and a11y:certifiedBy property differ).

							<metadata …>
  …
  <dc:publisher>
     Acme Publishing Inc.
  </dc:publisher>
  …
  <meta
      property="dcterms:conformsTo"
      id="conf">
     EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
  </meta>
  <meta
      property="a11y:certifiedBy"
      refines="#conf">
     Foo's Accessibility Testing
  </meta>
  …
</metadata>
						

						
    Example 4: An EPUB publication evaluated by the author
  
							In this example, the author is stating they self-evaluated the EPUB publication (the
								values of the dc:creator and a11y:certifiedBy property are the
								same).

							<metadata …>
  …
  <dc:creator>
     Jane Doe
  </dc:creator>
  …
  <meta
      property="dcterms:conformsTo"
      id="conf">
     EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
  </meta>
  
  <meta
      property="a11y:certifiedBy"
      refines="#conf">
     Jane Doe
  </meta>
  …
</metadata>
						

						
    Example 5: A self-evaluated EPUB 2 Publication
  
							This example is the same as the publisher example, but expressed in
								an EPUB 2 package document.

							<metadata …>
  …
  <dc:publisher>
     Acme Publishing Inc.
  </dc:publisher>
  …
  <meta
      name="dcterms:conformsTo"
      content="EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA"/>
  
  <meta
      name="a11y:certifiedBy"
      content="Acme Publishing Inc."/>
  …
</metadata>
						
					

					3.5.3.2 Evaluation date
						

						If the date the evaluation was performed on is known, include that information in a dcterms:date property [dcterms] associated with [epub-3] the evaluator's name.

						
    Example 6: Expressing the evaluation date
  
							<metadata …>
   …
   <meta
       property="a11y:certifiedBy"
       id="certifier">
      EPUB Accessibility Evaluator
   </meta>
   
   <meta
       property="dcterms:date"
       refines="#certifier">
      2021-09-07
   </meta>
   …
</metadata>
						
					

					3.5.3.3 Evaluator credentials
						

						If the evaluator has credentials or badges that establish their authority to evaluate
							content, include that information in an a11y:certifierCredential properties
							associated with [epub-3] the evaluator's name.

						
    Example 7: Expressing a basic credential
  
							In this example, the refines attribute associates the credential with the
								certifier.
							<metadata …>
   …
   <meta
       property="dcterms:conformsTo"
       id="conf">
     EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
   </meta>
   
   <meta
       property="a11y:certifiedBy"
       refines="#conf"
       id="certifier">
      EPUB Accessibility Evaluator
   </meta>
   
   <meta
       property="a11y:certifierCredential"
       refines="#certifier">
      A+ Accessibility Rating
   </meta>
</metadata>
						
					

					3.5.3.4 Evaluator report
						

						If the evaluator provides a publicly-readable report of its assessment, provide a link to the
							assessment in an a11y:certifierReport property
							associated with [epub-3] the evaluator's name.

						
    Example 8: An external accessibility report
  
							The following example shows a link to an accessibility report hosted on a web site.
							<metadata …>
   <meta
       property="dcterms:conformsTo"
       id="conf">
     EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
   </meta>

   <meta
       property="a11y:certifiedBy"
       refines="#conf"
       id="certifier">
      EPUB Accessibility Evaluator
   </meta>
   
   <link
       rel="a11y:certifierReport"
       refines="#certifier"
       href="http://www.example.com/a11y/report/9780000000001"/>
</metadata>
						

						
    Example 9: A local accessibility report
  
							The following example shows a link to an accessibility report included in the EPUB container.
							<metadata …>
   <meta
       property="dcterms:conformsTo"
       id="conf">
     EPUB Accessibility 1.1 - WCAG 2.2 Level AA
   </meta>
   
   <meta
       property="a11y:certifiedBy"
       refines="#conf"
       id="certifier">
      EPUB Accessibility Evaluator
   </meta>

   <link
       rel="a11y:certifierReport"
       refines="#certifier"
       href="reports/a11y.xhtml"/>
</metadata>
						
					
				

				3.5.4 Re-evaluating conformanceThis section is non-normative.
					

					Note
						The following guidance is provided only to help EPUB creators determine when a
							new evaluation is necessary. It is not a conformance requirement of this specification.
					

					How long a conformance evaluation of an EPUB publication is good for is
						a complex question. Unlike web sites, which are continuously evolving, EPUB creators may not
						update EPUB publications after their initial publication. As a result, an unmodified EPUB
						publication will always conform to its last evaluation.

					It is common in publishing, however, to release updated versions of an EPUB publication to fix
						errors and typos in the work, as well as to periodically release new editions. As not all
						changes to an EPUB publication substantively change its accessibility, this complicates the
						question of when EPUB creators should perform a new evaluation, as well as whether a full or
						partial re-evaluation will suffice.

					As a rule, EPUB creators must re-evaluate their content whenever they make substantive changes to
						the structure and functionality of an EPUB publication, such as:

					
						modifications to the nature or order of markup in EPUB content
							documents;
						additions or modifications to images that convey information;
						modifications to formatting that affects the readability (e.g., contrast); and
						additions or modifications to interactive controls, forms, etc.
					

					If the EPUB publication includes substantively the same markup and content as the previous
						release, the EPUB creator may only need to evaluate the new modifications to re-confirm
						conformance.

					If an updated version of this specification or [wcag2] has been published since the last
						release of the EPUB publication, however, this specification also recommends performing a new
						evaluation to ensure conformance to the latest standards. EPUB creators may not have to perform
						a full re-evaluation even in this case (i.e., they may only need to check new or modified
						success criteria unless the standards undergo major changes to methodology or conformance).

					Conversely, EPUB creators do not need to perform a re-evaluation when making non-substantive
						changes, such as:

					
						fixes for typographic errors in the text (i.e., no markup is changed);
						additions or modifications to decorative images;
						modifications to the formatting that do not affect the understanding of the content or
							change the text display; and
						modifications to package
								document metadata.
					

					Individuals qualified to assess the accessibility of EPUB publications should make the
						determination of whether changes are substantive or not. An editor, for example, may not realize
						the impact of seemingly minor formatting changes.

					Even in the case of non-substantive changes, this specification recommends an updated evaluation
						(full or partial) if the accessibility standards have changed.

					EPUB creators should consider even more progressive approaches than those described here. Waiting
						for content changes before reviewing and updating the accessibility of EPUB publications can
						leave them lacking recent improvements. For example, a publisher might prioritize periodic
						reviews of their top-selling EPUB publications to ensure they remain maximally usable to the
						widest possible audience.
				
			
		
		4. Optimized publicationsThis section is non-normative.
			

			Although WCAG [wcag2] provides a general set of guidelines for making content broadly accessible,
				conformant content is not always optimal for specific user groups. Conversely, content optimized for a
				specific need or reading modality is often not conformant to WCAG exactly because it targets a specific
				audience.

			For example, an EPUB publication with
				synchronized text and audio can contain a full audio recording of the content but limit the text content
				to only the major headings. In this case, the EPUB publication is consumable by users who needs to hear
				the content (i.e., they can listen to the full publication and can navigate between headings), but it is
				not usable by anyone who cannot hear the audio.

			In other words, when an EPUB creator optimizes
				an EPUB publication for a specific reading modality, the failure to achieve a WCAG conformance level
				does not make it any less accessible to the intended audience.

			Defining requirements for optimized publications is outside the scope of this specification, as is
				formally recognizing other standards and guidelines that address these specific needs. The general model
				of this specification can be used as a basis for identifying how an EPUB creator has optimized their
				content, however.

			In particular, if an EPUB publication meets the requirements of an optimization standard, the following
				best practices are recommended:

			
				The EPUB publication should meet the discovery metadata requirements of
					this specification so its accessible properties are machine-readable.
				The EPUB publication should identify the standard or guidelines it follows in a
						conformsTo property in accordance with [dcterms] so this information can be made
					available to users.
				If the standard does not define conformance values for the conformsTo property, EPUB
					creators should use a URL [url] to where the standard is publicly available so users can look up
					the specific details of the standard.
				If the identifier is not sufficient for a user to understand conformance (e.g., the guidelines are
					not publicly available), EPUB creators should provide additional information about they have
					optimized the content in the accessibility
						summary.
			

			When creating guidelines for optimized EPUB publications, it is recommended that these practices be
				integrated as a formal requirement for conformance.

			Note
				Refer to the Guide to Optimized
						Publication Standards for a non-normative list of standards.
			

			
    Example 10: Expressing conformance to an optimization standard
  
				In this example, the conformance statement indicates the EPUB 3 publication conforms to the DAISY
					Navigable Audio-only EPUB 3 Guidelines [daisyaudio].
				<metadata …>
   …
   <link
       rel="dcterms:conformsTo"
       href="https://daisy.org/info-help/guidance-training/standards/navigable-audio-only-epub3-guidelines/"/>
   …
</metadata>
			

			
    Example 11: Describing conformance in a summary
  
				In this example, the accessibility summary for an EPUB publication explains that it is optimized for
					braille rendering.
				<metadata …>
   …
   <meta property="schema:accessibilitySummary">
       This publication is optimized for braille readers. It will not be 
       usable by persons who cannot read braille. The publication is designed
       for braille reading devices capable of displaying 6-character cells and
       40-character line lengths. The text is not contracted, and follows 
       Unified English Braille formatting conventions. All characters are
       encoded using the Unicode braille character set.
   </meta>
   …
</metadata>
			

			
    Example 12: Summary for a publication optimized for audio rendering
  
				<metadata …>
   …
   <meta property="schema:accessibilitySummary">
       This publication is an audio book. It will not be usable by persons who 
       cannot hear the audio. The publication is recorded by a professional
       narrator. There is navigation to the beginning of each chapter. The text
       of the publication is not included. Images are not included, but the
       photo captions are narrated at the end of the chapter where they occur.
   </meta>
   …
</metadata>
			
		
		5. DistributionThis section is non-normative.
			

			Note
				Although EPUB creators do not have to
					follow the recommendations in this section to conform to this specification, some jurisdictions
					require EPUB creators to follow similar practices. Directive
						2019/882, for example, includes similar requirements for digital publications distributed in
					the European Union.
			

			The creation of accessible EPUB
					publications does not guarantee that the publication will be obtainable or consumable by users
				in an accessible fashion. Depending on how EPUB creators distribute their EPUB publications, other
				factors will influence their overall accessibility. For example, an accessible interface for locating
				and obtaining content is an essential part of the distribution process, as is the ability to search and
				review accessibility metadata.

			While much of the distribution process is outside the control of EPUB creators, so outside the scope of
				this specification, there are factors an EPUB creator can control. For example, while an EPUB creator
				typically does not control the accessibility of the digital rights management (DRM) scheme applied to
				their EPUB publications, they do control what usage rights to apply to their EPUB publications. So even
				though a DRM scheme may allow an Author to block access to the text of the publication, the EPUB creator
				needs to take care not to apply such a restriction as it could block the ability for assistive
					technologies to read the text aloud.

			To minimize the effects of distribution on accessibility, this specification advises EPUB creators adhere
				to the following distribution practices:

			
				they must not impose restrictions that impair access by assistive technologies; and
				they must include accessibility metadata in the record format required for distribution of an EPUB
					publication (e.g., [onix] or [marc21]) when the format supports such metadata.
			

			Note
				A distributor may implement a digital rights management scheme that inherently impairs accessibility
					through no fault of the EPUB creator. Following the guidance in this section does not restrict EPUB
					creators from using such distributors. The intent is only that the EPUB creator not impair
					accessibility by activating a feature that would normally not be active.
			
		
		6. Privacy and security
			

			The authoring of accessible content does not introduce any new privacy or security considerations for
				users. Meeting accessibility requirements is about optimally using the available technologies, and no
				new features are introduced by this specification.

			The inclusion of accessibility metadata by EPUB
					creators similarly does not introduce security or privacy issues for the EPUB creator, as
				describing an EPUB publication only
				provides a general idea of its suitability for different user groups.

			The use of accessibility metadata in reading systems, bookstores and any other interface that can build a profile of the user, on
				the other hand, has the potential to violate the user's privacy. While it might seem helpful to store
				and anticipate the type of content a user is most likely to consume, for example, or how best to
				initiate its playback, developers should not engage in such profiling unless explicit permission is
				obtained from the user and a means of easily removing the profile is available.

			Even in the case where a user assents to the application maintaining information about their
				accessibility needs, developers SHOULD ensure that this information is kept private (e.g., not share the
				information with third party advertisers or even with the original publisher).

			Developers SHOULD NOT store or mine information about the types of searches a user performs when
				searching for content based on its accessibility characteristics. This information can be used to
				indirectly profile the abilities of users.
		
		A. EPUB accessibility vocabulary
			

			A.1 Overview
				

				A.1.1 About this vocabulary
					

					This vocabulary defines properties for describing the accessibility of EPUB publications in the package document metadata.
				

				A.1.2 Referencing
					

					The base URL for referencing this vocabulary is
							http://idpf.org/epub/vocab/package/a11y/#.

					This specification reserves the prefix "a11y:" for use with properties in this
						vocabulary. EPUB creators do not have
						to declare the prefix in the package
							document.
				
				A.1.3 Certifier properties
					

					A.1.3.1 certifiedBy
						

						
							Definition of the certifiedBy property
							
								Name:
								
									certifiedBy
								
							
							
								Description:
								Identifies a party responsible for the testing and certification of the
									accessibility of an EPUB
										publication.
							
							
								Allowed value(s):
								
									xsd:string
								
							
							
								Cardinality:
								One or more
							
							
								Example:
								
									<meta
    property="a11y:certifiedBy">
   Accessibility Testers Group
</meta>
								
							
						
					

					A.1.3.2 certifierCredential
						

						
							Definition of the certifierCredential property
							
								Name:
								
									certifierCredential
								
							
							
								Description:
								Identifies a credential or badge that establishes the authority of the party
									identified in the associated certifiedBy
										property to certify content accessible.
							
							
								Allowed value(s):
								
									xsd:string
								
							
							
								Cardinality:
								Zero or more

							
							
								Extends:
								
									a11y:certifiedBy
								
							
							
								Example:
								
									<meta
    property="a11y:certifiedBy"
    id="certifier">
   Accessibility Testers Group
</meta>
<meta
    property="a11y:certifierCredential"
    refines="#certifier">
   DAISY OK
</meta>
								
							
						
					

					A.1.3.3 certifierReport
						

						
							Definition of the certifierReport property
							
								Name:
								
									certifierReport
								
							
							
								Description:
								Provides a link to an accessibility report created by the party identified in the
									associated certifiedBy property.
							
							
								Allowed value(s):
								
									xsd:anyURI
								
							
							
								Cardinality:
								Zero or more
							
							
								Extends:
								
									
										certifiedBy
									
								
							
							
								Example:
								
									<meta
    property="a11y:certifiedBy"
    id="certifier">
   Accessibility Testers Group
</meta>
<link
    rel="a11y:certifierReport"
    refines="#certifier"
    href="https://example.com/a11y-report/"/>
								
							
						
					
				
			
		
		B. IndexB.1 Terms defined by this specification
    
    
    
      assistive technology 
    §1.4
  
  B.2 Terms defined by reference
    
    
    
        [EPUB-A11Y-TECH-11] defines the following:
        
          
    Discovery Metadata Techniques
  
    Ensuring complete text coverage
  
    EPUB Accessibility Techniques
  
    Identifying escapable structures
  
    Identifying skippable structures
  
    Identifying the pagination source
  
    Include accessibility metadata in distribution records
  
    Provide a page list
  
    Provide page break markers
  
    Specifying the reading order
  
    Synchronizing the navigation document
  
        
      
        [WCAG2] defines the following:
        
          
    conformance criteria
  
    conforming alternate version
  
    definition of assistive technology
  
    Full Pages
  
    Info and Relationships success criterion
  
    latest recommended version of WCAG 2
  
    Level A
  
    Level AA
  
    level AAA
  
    Multiple Ways success criterion
  
    principles
  
    set of web pages
  
        
      
        [XML] defines the following:
        
          
    whitespace normalization
  
        
      
  
  
		C. Change logThis section is non-normative.
			

			Note that this change log only identifies substantive changes since EPUB Accessibility 1.0 — those that may affect the conformance of EPUB publications.

			For a list of all issues addressed, refer to the working group's issue tracker.

			
				Substantive changes since the Recommendation of 2023-05-25
				No substantive changes were made.
			

			
				Substantive changes since the Candidate Recommendation of 2022-05-12
				
					12-Aug-2022: Changed accessibilitySummary from a required to a recommended property
						and updated its definition to focus less on repeating information available in the other
						metadata. See issue 2399.
					12-Aug-2022: Changed the conformance identifier for publications to be more human-readable while
						still machine-processable so that the information is not needlessly duplicated in the summary.
						See issue 2398.
					07-June-2022: Updated privacy and security recommendations to use normative language.
					17-May-2022: Added an index of terms. See issue 2260.
				
			

			
				Substantive changes since EPUB Accessibility
					1.0
				
					12-Apr-2022: Restored recommendation to include links to all reproduced pages in the page list
						and added a requirement to link to all page break markers to address concerns with the previous
						change. Clarified that meeting the page navigation requirements is required, but adding page
						navigation is only recommended in some circumstances. See pull request 2246.
					12-Apr-2022: Generalized discussion of synchronized text-audio playback objectives and moved
						specific details of using media overlays to the techniques document. See issue 2221.
					08-Apr-2022: Changed the recommendation to include links to all reproduced pages in the page
						list to a requirement. See issue
							2220.
					23-Mar-2022: Clarified linking for WCAG conformance versions and levels. See issue 2099.
					21-Mar-2022: Note that not all metadata expressions can be achieved in EPUB 2 due to the absence
						of the refines attribute. See issue 2042.
					28-Sep-2021: The section on optimized publication has been made non-normative and rewritten to
						highlight best practices for identifying conformance to such standards. See pull request 1833.
					23-Sep-2021: Added section explaining effects of internationalization on techniques used. See issue 1790.
					07-Sep-2021: Added refines attribute to certifier metadata examples to show the
						expected linkage. See issue
						1789.
					07-Sep-2021: Added explanation that the dcterms:date property can be used to
						indicate when an evaluation was performed. See issue 1590.
					09-June-2021: Clarified that a pagination source must not be specified when page break markers
						and/or a page list are included in a digital-only publication. See issue 1599.
					29-Apr-2021: Change conformance identifiers to use hyphens and dashes so they are not confused
						for plain language strings. See issue
							1455.
					26-Mar-2021: Added non-normative section detailing when to re-evaluate EPUB publications. See issue 1470.
					12-Mar-2021: Changed the distribution section to non-normative but added a note that the
						requirements must be followed where required by law (e.g., in the EU). See issue 1487.
					08-Mar-2021: Add objective for the sequence of par and seq elements in
						media overlay documents to reflect a logical reading order. See issue 1556.
					05-Mar-2021: Added recommendation that page markers be included for all pages of content
						reproduced from source and best practice to include markers for all pages in the source. See issue 1502.
					05-Mar-2021: Added recommendation that page list include links to all pages of content
						reproduced from source and best practice to include links to all pages in the source. See issue 1503.
					05-Mar-2021: Restructured the EPUB Requirements section to split out the individual objectives
						that were grouped together under the Page Navigation and Media Overlays headings. See issue 1458.
					25-Feb-2021: Replaced the IDPF URLs used to report conformance to the 1.0 specification with
						more flexible text strings. See issue
							1455.
					19-Feb-2021: References to WCAG 2.0 have been updated to undated references to WCAG 2 (except
						where WCAG 2.0 is explicitly mentioned for conformance).
					01-Feb-2021: Changed the recommendation that media overlays conform to the requirements of the
						EPUB specification to a requirement. See issue 1486.
					17-Nov-2020: Added the refines attribute to the certifierCredential
						and certifierReport properties and examples. See issue 1410.
					16-Nov-2020: References to the optional accessibility control and API metadata have been removed
						from the discoverability section. These metadata properties are more applicable to reading
						systems. See issue 1327.
					26-Sept-2020: The revisions made to the Accessibility 1.0 specification as part of publishing it
						as an ISO standard have been incorporated into the initial draft text.
				
			
		
		D. AcknowledgementsThis section is non-normative.
    

	The journey to make publications accessible for all can sometimes feels like a long and winding road. It
		takes a special kind of person with strong dedication to the goal and an abundance of perseverance to
		keep going even when it seems like there are still miles to go and many hills to climb. Ben Schroeter
		was one such person, working tirelessly to help EPUB reach its potential as a universally accessible
		format. We miss him greatly and dedicate this document to his memory.

    The following members of the EPUB 3 Working Group contributed to the development of this specification:

    
                Shadi Abou-Zahra (Amazon)
        Will AWAD (Newgen Knowledgeworks)
        Noel Ray Barron (Apple Inc.)
        Sofia Bautista (Legible Media Inc.)
        Leah Brochu (National Network for Equitable Library Service)
        Matthew C. Chan (House of Anansi Press)
        Yu-Wei Chang (Taiwan Digital Publishing Forum)
        Juan Corona (Legible Media Inc.)
        Dave Cramer (W3C Invited Expert, chair)
        Romain Deltour (DAISY Consortium)
        Marisa DeMeglio (DAISY Consortium)
        Brady Duga (Google LLC)
        Reinaldo Ferraz (NIC.br - Brazilian Network Information Center)
        Symon Flaming (Rakuten Group, Inc.)
        John Foliot (W3C Invited Expert)
        Teenya Franklin (Pearson plc)
        Hadrien Gardeur (EDRLab)
        Matt Garrish (DAISY Consortium)
        Jen Goulden (Crawford Technologies)
        David Hall (Apple Inc.)
        Ivan Herman (W3C, staff contact)
        Tetsu Hoshino (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        jasen huang (ByteDance)
        Norikazu Ishizu (Kadokawa Corporation)
        Norihito IYENAGA (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Rick Johnson (VitalSource Technologies)
        Ken Jones (Circular Software)
        Antonio Kamiya (Dentsu Group Inc.)
        Deborah Kaplan (W3C Invited Expert)
        Bill Kasdorf (Book Industry Study Group)
        Hiroshi Kawada (MEDIA DO Co., Ltd.)
        George Kerscher (DAISY Consortium)
        Kazuhito Kidachi (Mitsue-Links Co., Ltd.)
        Masakazu Kitahara (Voyager Japan, Inc.)
        Toshiaki Koike (Voyager Japan, Inc.)
        Ryo Kuroda (ACCESS CO., LTD.)
        Charles LaPierre (Benetech)
        Dan Lazin (Google LLC)
        Philippe Le Hegaret (W3C)
        Laurent Le Meur (EDRLab)
        YuYu Lin (Taiwan Digital Publishing Forum)
        Farrah Little (National Network for Equitable Library Service)
        Victor Lopes (Apple Inc.)
        Karan  Malhotra (Newgen Knowledgeworks)
        Makoto Murata (DAISY Consortium)
        Cristina Mussinelli (Fondazione LIA)
        Yoichiro Nagao (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Theresa O'Connor (Apple Inc.)
        Yoshinori Ohmura (SHUEISHA Inc.)
        Rachel Osolen (National Network for Equitable Library Service)
        Gregorio Pellegrino (Fondazione LIA)
        Vijaya Gowri Perumal (Newgen Knowledgeworks)
        Wendy Reid (Rakuten Group, Inc., chair)
        John Roque (Apple Inc.)
        Leonard Rosenthol (Adobe)
        Shinobu Sato (Kadokawa Corporation)
        Ben Schroeter (Pearson plc)
        Daihei Shiohama (MEDIA DO Co., Ltd.)
        Tzviya Siegman (Wiley)
        Avneesh Singh (DAISY Consortium)
        MOTOI SUZUKI (SHUEISHA Inc.)
        Yutaka Suzuki (Kadokawa Corporation)
        Kyrce Swenson (Pearson plc)
        Shinya Takami (Kadokawa Corporation, chair)
        Mateus Teixeira (W. W. Norton & Company)
        Yukio Tomikura (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Aimee Ubbink (Crawford Technologies)
        xinyuan wang (ByteDance)
        Daniel Weck (DAISY Consortium)
        Fuqiao Xue (W3C)
        Evan Yamanishi (W. W. Norton & Company)
        Osamu Yoshiba (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Junichi Yoshii (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Naomi Yoshizawa (W3C)
        Laurence Zaysser (EDRLab)
    
    


	

E. ReferencesE.1 Normative references
    
    [dcterms]
      DCMI Metadata Terms. DCMI Usage Board.  DCMI. 20 January 2020. DCMI Recommendation. URL: https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/dcmi-terms/
    [dom]
      DOM Standard. Anne van Kesteren.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/
    [epub-3]
      EPUB 3.  W3C. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/epub/
    [RFC2119]
      Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels. S. Bradner.  IETF. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119
    [RFC8174]
      Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words. B. Leiba.  IETF. May 2017. Best Current Practice. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174
    [schema-org]
      Schema.org. W3C Schema.org Community Group.  W3C. 6.0. URL: https://schema.org/
    [wcag2]
      Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.  W3C. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG2/
    [wcag20]
      Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. Ben Caldwell; Michael Cooper; Loretta Guarino Reid; Gregg Vanderheiden et al.  W3C. 11 December 2008. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
    [xml]
      Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition). Tim Bray; Jean Paoli; Michael Sperberg-McQueen; Eve Maler; François Yergeau et al.  W3C. 26 November 2008. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/xml/
    
  E.2 Informative references
    
    [a11y-discov-vocab]
      Schema.org Accessibility Properties for Discoverability Vocabulary. URL: https://www.w3.org/2021/a11y-discov-vocab/latest/
    [daisyaudio]
      Navigable audio-only EPUB 3 Guidelines. URL: https://daisy.org/info-help/guidance-training/standards/navigable-audio-only-epub3-guidelines/
    [dpub-aria-1.0]
      Digital Publishing WAI-ARIA Module 1.0. Matt Garrish; Tzviya Siegman; Markus Gylling; Shane McCarron.  W3C. 14 December 2017. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/dpub-aria-1.0/
    [epub-a11y-exemption]
      The EPUB Accessibility exemption property. Matt Garrish; Gregorio Pellegrino.  W3C. 6 September 2024. W3C Working Group Note. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-a11y-exemption/
    [epub-a11y-tech-11]
      EPUB Accessibility Techniques 1.1. Matt Garrish; George Kerscher; Charles LaPierre; Gregorio Pellegrino; Avneesh Singh.  W3C. 4 July 2024. W3C Working Group Note. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-a11y-tech-11/
    [marc21]
      MARC 21 XML. URL: https://www.loc.gov/standards/marcxml/
    [onix]
      ONIX for Books 3.0. URL: https://www.editeur.org/8/ONIX/
    [opf-201]
      Open Packaging Format 2.0.1.  IDPF. 04 September 2010. URL: https://idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm
    [url]
      URL Standard. Anne van Kesteren.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://url.spec.whatwg.org/
    [wai-aria]
      Accessible Rich Internet Applications (WAI-ARIA) 1.0. James Craig; Michael Cooper et al.  W3C. 20 March 2014. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/
    
  
    ↑
  
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.1.3.3 Page breaks 
    
      § 5. Distribution 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 2.2 Package metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.2.3.1 Completeness 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.2 Success techniques 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.2.3.4 Escapability 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.2.3.3 Skippability 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.1.3.1 Pagination source 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 2.2 Package metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.1.3.2 Page list 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.1.3.3 Page breaks 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.2.3.2 Reading order 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.2.3.5 Navigation document 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.2.2 Applying the conformance criteria 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.2.2 Applying the conformance criteria 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.4 Terminology 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.2.2 Applying the conformance criteria 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.2.1 Overview 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.1 WCAG conformance requirements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.1 WCAG conformance requirements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.1 WCAG conformance requirements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.1 WCAG conformance requirements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4.1.1 Overview 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.2.1 Page and publication 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3.2.1 Page and publication 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.5.2 Publication conformance 
    
  
    