







		
		
EPUB Reading Systems 3.3
		

		
		
		
		
		
		

	









	
    
  
    EPUB Reading Systems 3.3 
    W3C Recommendation 17 October 2024
    
      More details about this document
      
        This version:
                https://www.w3.org/TR/2024/REC-epub-rs-33-20241017/
              
        Latest published version:
                https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-rs-33/
              
        Latest editor's draft:https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/rs/
        History:
                    https://www.w3.org/standards/history/epub-rs-33/
                  
                    Commit history
                  
        Test suite:https://w3c.github.io/epub-tests/index.html
        Implementation report:
                https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/reports/
              
        
        
        
        Editors:
    Matt Garrish (DAISY Consortium)
  
    Ivan Herman
    
    
    
   (W3C)
  
    Dave Cramer (Invited Expert)
  
        
        
        Feedback:
        GitHub w3c/epub-specs
        (pull requests,
        new issue,
        open issues)
      public-pm-wg@w3.org with subject line [epub-rs-33] … message topic … (archives)
        Errata:https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/errata.html
        This document is also available in this non-normative format:
    EPUB 3
  
      
    
    
          See also
          
            translations.
        
    
    
	Copyright © 1999-2024
	International Digital Publishing Forum
	and
	World Wide Web Consortium. 
	W3C® 
	liability, 
	trademark and 
	permissive document license rules apply.

    
  
		
		Abstract
			EPUB® 3 defines a distribution and interchange format for digital publications and documents. The EPUB
				format provides a means of representing, packaging, and encoding structured and semantically enhanced
				web content — including HTML, CSS, SVG and other resources — for distribution in a single-file
				container.
			This specification defines the conformance requirements for EPUB 3 reading systems — the user agents that
				render EPUB publications.
		
		Status of This DocumentThis section describes the status of this
      document at the time of its publication. A list of current W3C
      publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found
      in the W3C technical reports index at
      https://www.w3.org/TR/.
    This document was published by the Publishing Maintenance Working Group as
    a Recommendation using the
        Recommendation track. 
  
      W3C recommends the wide deployment of this specification as a standard for
      the Web.
    
      A W3C Recommendation is a specification that, after extensive
      consensus-building, is endorsed by
      W3C and its Members, and
      has commitments from Working Group members to
      royalty-free licensing
      for implementations.
      Future updates to this Recommendation may incorporate
            new features.
    
    
        This document was produced by a group
        operating under the
        W3C Patent
          Policy.
      
    
                W3C maintains a
                public list of any patent disclosures
          made in connection with the deliverables of
          the group; that page also includes
          instructions for disclosing a patent. An individual who has actual
          knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains
          Essential Claim(s)
          must disclose the information in accordance with
          section 6 of the W3C Patent Policy.
        
  
                      This document is governed by the
                      03 November 2023 W3C Process Document.
                    Table of ContentsAbstractStatus of This Document1. Introduction1.1 Overview1.2 Terminology1.3 Conformance1.4 Relationship to other specifications1.4.1 Relationship to HTML1.4.2 Relationship to SVG2. Reading system conformance2.1 Requirements2.2 Error handling2.3 Error reporting3. Publication resource processing3.1 Core Media types3.2 Foreign resources3.3 Resource locations3.4 Data URLs3.5 File URLs3.6 XML processing3.7 Internationalization3.8 Network access3.9 External links4. Open Container Format (OCF) processing4.1 OCF abstract container4.1.1 URL of the root directory4.1.2 File names4.1.3 META-INF directory4.2 OCF ZIP container4.3 Font obfuscation5. Package document processing5.1 Base direction5.2 Unique identifier5.3 Metadata5.4 Manifest5.5 Spine5.5.1 Spine overrides5.6 Collections5.7 Legacy features6. EPUB content document processing6.1 XHTML content documents6.1.1 HTML extensions6.1.1.1 RDFa6.1.1.2 Content switching (deprecated)6.1.1.3 The epub:trigger element (deprecated)6.1.1.4 Custom attributes6.1.2 HTML deviations and constraints6.1.2.1 Microdata6.1.2.2 MathML6.1.2.3 Embedded SVG6.1.2.3.1 Embedded SVG and CSS6.1.2.4 Form submission6.2 SVG content documents6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)6.4 Scripting6.4.1 Local storage6.4.2 Event model6.4.3 Security considerations7. Navigation document processing8. Layout rendering control processing8.1 Fixed-layout documents8.1.1 Fixed-layout properties8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property8.1.1.2 The rendition:orientation property8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions8.1.3 Viewport rendering8.2 Reflowable layouts8.2.1 The rendition:flow property8.2.2 The rendition:align-x-center property8.3 The viewport meta tag8.4 Custom properties9. Media overlays processing9.1 Loading the media overlay9.2 Basic playback9.2.1 Timing and synchronization9.2.2 Rendering audio9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements9.3 Interacting with the EPUB content document9.3.1 Navigation9.3.2 Embedded audio and video (deprecated)9.3.3 Text-to-speech9.4 Skippability and escapability9.4.1 Skippability9.4.2 Escapability10. Processing structural semantics11. Processing property values12. Backward compatibility13. Forward compatibility14. Accessibility15. Security and privacy15.1 Overview15.2 Threat model15.3 RecommendationsA. Unsupported featuresB. epubReadingSystem objectB.1 Interface definitionB.2 DescriptionB.3 PropertiesB.4 MethodsB.4.1 hasFeatureB.4.1.1 DescriptionB.4.1.2 FeaturesC. IndexC.1 Terms defined by this specificationC.2 Terms defined by referenceD. Change logE. AcknowledgementsF. ReferencesF.1 Normative referencesF.2 Informative references
		1. Introduction
			

			1.1 OverviewThis section is non-normative.
				

				The EPUB 3 standard is separated into two distinct concerns: the authoring of EPUB publications
					is defined in the core specification [epub-33], while this
					specification details the rendering requirements for them in EPUB reading system.

				An EPUB reading system can take many forms. It might have a visual display area for rendering the
					content to users, for example, or it might only provide audio playback of the content. Therefore,
					there is no single set of rules that applies to all reading systems. Rather, this specification
					breaks down the rendering requirements based on a reading system's capabilities and the features it
					supports.

				Moreover, this specification allows for a great deal of flexibility for developers to create unique
					user interfaces, and requirements for things like metadata processing are intentionally minimal to
					allow for such flexibility.

				So, although this specification identifies the formal requirements for reading systems, it is not
					possible to understand this document in isolation. Developers should also familiarize themselves
					with the full content structure of an EPUB publication in order to understand the complete range of
					information that is available.

				Note
					A conforming reading system is not necessarily a single dedicated program or device but might
						exist as a distributed system.
				
			

			1.2 Terminology
				

				This specification uses terminology defined in EPUB 3.3
					[epub-33].

				It also defines the following term:

				
					
						content display area
					
					
						The area within the viewport dedicated to the display of EPUB content documents.
							The content display area excludes any borders, margins, headers, footers, or other
							decoration a EPUB reading system might inject into the viewport.
						In the case of synthetic spreads, the viewport contains two content display areas.
					
				

				Note
					Only the first instance of a term in a section links to its definition.
				
			

			1.3 ConformanceAs well as sections marked as non-normative, all authoring guidelines, diagrams, examples, and notes in this specification are non-normative. Everything else in this specification is normative.
        The key words MAY, MUST, MUST NOT, OPTIONAL, RECOMMENDED, SHOULD, and SHOULD NOT in this document
        are to be interpreted as described in
        BCP 14
        [RFC2119] [RFC8174]
        when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
      
				All algorithm explanations are non-normative.
			

			1.4 Relationship to other specificationsThis section is non-normative.
				

				1.4.1 Relationship to HTML
					

					The [html] standard is continuously evolving — there are no longer versioned releases of
						it. That standard, in turn, references various technologies that continue to evolve, such as
						MathML, SVG, CSS, and JavaScript.

					Reading system developers must keep track of the changes to HTML, and the technologies it
						references, to ensure they keep their systems up to date.

					This specification does not require EPUB reading systems to support scripting, form submission,
						or the HTML DOM [dom]. Reading systems conformant with this specification are only expected to
						be able to process a conforming EPUB content document. As support for scripting and form
						submission is not compulsory, a conformant reading system might not be a fully conformant HTML
						user agent.
				


				1.4.2 Relationship to SVG
					

					This specification does not reference a specific version of [svg], but instead uses an undated
						reference. Whenever there is any ambiguity in this reference, the latest recommended
						specification is the authoritative reference.

					This approach ensures that EPUB will always keep pace with changes to the SVG standard. Reading system developers must keep track of changes to the SVG standard to ensure that they keep
						their systems up to date.
				
			
		
		2. Reading system conformance
			

			2.1 Requirements
				

				Whether a reading system has to support a feature is mentioned at the beginning of its section.
					To be conformant with this specification, reading systems MUST support all required features as well
					as all applicable conditionally-required features (e.g., to support image rendering if the reading
					system has a viewport) as defined in their respective sections.

				Note As a reading system is not necessarily a single application, but may exist as a
					distributed system, it is not always the case that reading system requirements will be met in the
					application that renders EPUB publications to users. An example is a reading system that solely
					interacts with a controlled content repository (e.g., a bookstore or library system). In this case,
					if a reading system developer can demonstrate that requirements are not applicable to the
					application (e.g., EPUB publications with duplicate itemref entries [epub-33] cannot enter the
					system), the reading system as a whole is still considered conforming. 

				When supporting recommended and optional features, reading systems MUST meet all normative
					requirements as defined in their respective sections.

				When reading system developers opt not to support a recommended or optional feature, it does not
					always mean none of the normative requirements of the section apply. In some cases, there may be
					alternative requirements when not implementing a feature (e.g., to process fallbacks when scripting is not supported). Reading
					systems MUST meet these alternative requirements when not supporting a feature.

				Note
					EPUB publications frequently contain information not required by this specification (e.g.,
						package document metadata). Reading systems may use this additional information for any
						purposes (e.g., to improve the user interface).
				
			

			2.2 Error handling
				

				Reading systems are not required to load EPUB publications, or resources within them, when they
					violate content authoring or processing requirements.
			

			2.3 Error reportingThis section is non-normative.
				

				Although reading systems are not required to report errors encountered while processing and rendering
					EPUB publications (e.g., if the dimensions of a fixed-layout document have been inferred),
					they are strongly encouraged to provide a means of accessing this information. A comparable example
					are the developer tools that web browsers provide for debugging HTML pages and applications.

				EPUB creators, for example, can greatly benefit from having access to such processing information
					(e.g., to efficiently debug their EPUB publications). For maximum use in debugging, it is
					recommended that reading systems not only report issues they directly encounter but also issues
					reported by any applications they use (e.g., HTML, CSS, and JavaScript errors reported from a
					browser core used to render the content, or validation issues reported by EPUBCheck).

				It is not expected that error reporting will be an intrusive experience that affects the general
					reading experience for users. Rather, reporting information could, for example, be selectively
					activated from a settings menu so that it does not bother users unnecessarily.
			
		
		3. Publication resource processing
			

			Reading systems MUST
				process publication resources [epub-33].

			3.1 Core Media types
				

				If a reading system
					has a viewport, it MUST support the image core media type
						resources [epub-33].

				If it has the
					capability to render prerecorded audio, it MUST support the audio core media type resources [epub-33].

				NoteIt is recommended that reading systems support at least one of
					the H.264 [h264] and VP8 [rfc6386] video codecs, but this is not a conformance requirement
					— a reading system may support any video codec, or none at all. Reading system developers
					should take into consideration factors such as breadth of adoption, playback quality, and technology
					royalties when deciding which video formats to support.
			

			3.2 Foreign resources
				

				Reading systems MAY support an arbitrary set of foreign resource types, and if a foreign
					resource is not supported, MUST process fallbacks as defined in foreign resources [epub-33].
			

			3.3 Resource locations
				

				Reading systems SHOULD support remote resources, as defined in Resource locations [epub-33].

				To limit the risk of network attacks, reading systems SHOULD only load remote resources referenced
					via the https URI scheme [rfc9110].
			

			3.4 Data URLs
				

				Reading systems MUST
					prevent data URLs [rfc2397] from opening in top-level browsing contexts [html], except when
					initiated through a reading system affordance such as a context menu. If a reading system does not
					use a top-level browsing context for top-level content documents, for example if the top-level
					content document is an SVG, it MUST also prevent data URLs from opening as though they are top-level
					content documents.
			

			3.5 File URLs
				
				Reading Systems MUST prevent access to
					resources referenced via file URLs [rfc8089].
			

			3.6 XML processing
				

				A reading system
					MUST use a non-validating XML processor [xml] that:

				
					does not read external DTD
						subsets [xml];
					conforms to [xml-names].
				
			

			3.7 Internationalization
				

				 As part of processing publication resources, a reading system is required to process the
					attributes to set the language and the base directions in XHTML content documents or SVG content documents, as well as the xml:lang
						attribute for all XML documents (e.g., the package document and media overlay documents). 

				Furthermore, a reading system MUST also process the dir attribute [epub-33] for the package document, where the base
					direction specified by dir applies to the element where it is specified, and to all
					elements in its content unless overridden with another instance of dir. (See also 5.1 Base direction for further details.)

				In the absence of this information in a publication resource, reading systems MUST NOT assume
					either the language or the base direction of that resource from information expressed in the package
					document (i.e., in xml:lang and dir attributes, in hreflang attributes on link elements, or from dc:language elements [epub-33]).
					Refer to a resource's formal specification for more information about to handle the absence of
					explicit language or direction information.
			

			3.8 Network access
				

				Reading systems MAY support network access to retrieve remote
						resources and to allow scripted content documents to communicate with web-hosted APIs and retrieve
					resources.

				Providing network access, however, increases both the security risks to the reading systems and the
					security and privacy risks to users. These risks are often unique to reading systems and the
					platforms they run on — the browser cores that most reading systems are built on do not offer
					the same security and privacy controls as web browsers themselves. Consequently, developers need to
					use extra caution when allowing network access, and more thoroughly test that their reading systems
					are not vulnerable to attacks. More information about these risks is provided in 15. Security and privacy.

				If reading system developers allow network access, it is RECOMMENDED both that they:

				
					notify users when network activity occurs; and
					let users block access to the network (e.g., disable network access for the reading system
						globally or for a particular EPUB publication).
				
			

			3.9 External links
				

				When a link has an http or https
					scheme [url], reading systems:

				
					SHOULD obtain the user's consent before opening the link.
					SHOULD open the link in a new browser instance to ensure that the browser's security and privacy
						controls are available to users.
				

				For links that have schemes
					that require a helper application to load, reading systems SHOULD obtain the user's consent and
					follow platform guidance for opening the helper application.

				Note
					External links are not only found in EPUB content documents. A reading system might provide
						access to external linked records [epub-33] in the
							package document metadata, for example.
				

				Note
					For more information about security and privacy issues with external links, see 15.2 Threat model.
				
			
		
		4. Open Container Format (OCF) processing
			

			Reading systems MUST
				process the EPUB container [epub-33].

			Note
				An application that processes EPUB containers does not have to be a full-fledged reading system
					(e.g., an application might only extract the content of a container or check the validity of the
					packaged content). In these cases, developers of such applications can ignore the rendering
					requirements for reading systems defined in this section.
			

			4.1 OCF abstract container
				

				4.1.1 URL of the root directory
					

					Reading systems MUST
						assign a URL [url] to the root directory of the OCF abstract container. This URL is
						called the container root URL. It is implementation specific, but the implementation MUST
						have the following properties:

					
						The result of parsing [url] "/" with the container root
								URL as base is the container
								root URL.
						The result of parsing [url] ".." with the container root
								URL as base is the container
								root URL.

						The origin [url] of the container root URL is unique for each user-specific
							instance of an EPUB publication in a reading system.
					

					NoteThe unicity of the origin [html] per each
						user-specific instance of an EPUB publication in a reading system means that if two different
						users acquire a copy of the same EPUB publication, the origins will be different for the two
						users on those copies even if the same reading system is used.

					Note
						The properties of the container root URL are such that a conforming reading system will
							parse any relative URL string to a content URL. In other words, relative links do not
							"leak" outside the container content, which is an important feature for security.

						In practice, the container root URL behaves similarly to a URL defined as follows:

						
							
								
									URL component
									Values
								
							
							
								
									scheme
									http or https
								
								
									host
									localhost
								
								
									port
									a dynamic port uniquely assigned to the EPUB instance
								
							
						

						for example:

						
							
								
									Container File
									File Path
									URL
								
							
							
								
									Root directory
									
										empty string
									
									
										http://localhost:49152/
									
								
								
									Package document
									
										EPUB/package.opf
									
									
										http://localhost:49152/EPUB/package.opf
									
								
								
									EPUB content document
									
										HTML/file name.xhtml
									
									
										http://localhost:49152/HTML/file%20name.xhtml
									
								
							
						

						
							
								
									URL string(found for
										example in the package document)
									content URL
								
							
							
								
									
										../HTML/file%20name.xhtml
									
									
										http://localhost:49152/HTML/file%20name.xhtml
									
								
								
									
										/Media/img.png
									
									
										http://localhost:49152/Media/img.png
									
								
								
									
										../../../Media/img.png
									
									
										http://localhost:49152/Media/img.png
									
								
							
						

						Note that the last two links are disallowed in an EPUB publications to ensure better interoperability with
							non-conforming or legacy reading systems and toolchains.
					

					Note
						Some language specifications reference Requests For Comments that preceded [url], in which case the earlier RFC applies
							for content in that particular language.
					

					Note
						Unlike most language specifications, reading systems must use the container root URL as
							the base URL [url] for all files within the
								META-INF directory. See also the section on Parsing URLs in the META-INF
								directory in [epub-33].
					
				

				4.1.2 File names
					

					Although EPUB creators are required to follow various file name and file path restrictions
						[epub-33] for maximum interoperability, reading systems SHOULD attempt to process file names
						and paths that do not adhere to these requirements. Invalid file names and paths may only be
						problematic on some operating systems.

					This specification does not specify how a reading system that is unable to represent OCF file
						names and paths would handle this incompatibility.
				

				4.1.3 META-INF directory
					

					
						Container file (container.xml)
						
							A reading system MUST, by
								default, use the package document referenced the from first rootfile element
								[epub-33] to render the EPUB publication. If the reading system recognizes a means
								of selecting from the other available options, it MAY choose a more appropriate package
								document.
						

						Metadata file (metadata.xml)
						
							Reading systems SHOULD ignore metadata.xml files [epub-33] with unrecognized root
								elements.
						

						Manifest file
								(manifest.xml)
						
							Reading systems MUST NOT use ancillary manifest information contained in the ZIP archive
								or in the manifest.xml file [epub-33] for processing an EPUB publication.
						

						Signature file (signatures.xml)
						
							Before computing the digest used to validate the signature in the signatures.xml
									file [epub-33], reading systems MUST decrypt any data encrypted after signing
								— data encrypted before signing MUST NOT be decrypted.
							Refer to Decryption Transform for XML Signature [xmlenc-decrypt] for more information
								about identifying data encrypted after signing.
						

						Other files
						
							Reading systems MUST NOT fail when encountering configuration files in the META-INF directory not listed in Reserved files [epub-33].
						
					
				
			

			4.2 OCF ZIP container
				

				A reading system:

				
					
						MUST treat any OCF ZIP container that
							splits the content into segments [zip] as in error.
					
					
						MUST treat any OCF ZIP container that uses
							compression techniques other than Deflate [rfc1951] as in error.
					
					
						MUST support the ZIP64 extensions defined as "Version 1" [zip].
					
					
						MUST treat an OCF ZIP container that uses [zip] encryption features as
							in error.
					
					
						MAY generate a physical directory for the root directory of the
							OCF abstract container if it unzips the contents.
					
					
						does not have to preserve information from an OCF ZIP container
							through load and save operations outside the context of the OCF abstract container. In
							particular, a reading system does not have to preserve CRC values, comment fields or fields
							that hold file system information corresponding to a particular operating system (e.g., External file attributes and Extra
								field).
					
				

				With respect to specific fields in the OCF ZIP container archive, the reading system:

				
					
						MUST treat version needed to extract field values
							other than 10, 20 or 45 in the local file header
							table [zip] as being in error.
					
					
						MUST treat compression method field values other than
								0 or 8 in the local file header table [zip] as being in
							error.
					
					
						MUST treat OCF ZIP containers with an Archive decryption
								header or an Archive extra data record [zip] as being in
							error.
					
				
			

			4.3 Font obfuscation
				

				Reading systems
					SHOULD support deobfuscation of fonts as defined in Font
						obfuscation [epub-33].

				To restore the original data, reading systems should simply reverse the process: the source file
					becomes the obfuscated data, and the destination file contains the raw data.

				Note
					EPUB 3 allowed font obfuscation prior to EPUB 3.0.1, but did not specify the order of obfuscation
						and compression. As a result, reading systems might encounter invalid fonts after decompression
						and deobfuscation. In such instances, deobfuscating the data before inflating it may return a
						valid font. Reading systems do not have to support this method of retrieval, but developers
						should consider it when supporting EPUB 3 content generally.
				
			
		
		5. Package document processing
			

			Reading systems MUST process the package document [epub-33].

			5.1 Base direction
				

				If the dir attribute [epub-33] is set and
					indicates a base direction of ltr or rtl, reading systems MUST override
					the bidi algorithm per the higher-level protocols
					defined in [bidi], setting the paragraph embedding level to 0 if the base direction is
						ltr, or 1 if the base direction is rtl.

				Otherwise
					the base direction is auto, in which case reading systems MUST determine the text's
					direction by applying the Unicode Bidi Algorithm, beginning with Rule P2
					of [bidi].

				Note
					Although setting the directionality of package document
							metadata is marked as under-implemented in
						[epub-33], reading system with an international audience, or that claim support for
						international content, are strongly advised to implement this feature when exposing that
						metadata to users. Ignoring the directionality of text can cause readability issues.
					The under-implemented label will be removed from [epub-33] when the necessary baseline of
						support in reading systems has been achieved.
				
			

			5.2 Unique identifier
				

				Reading systems SHOULD NOT depend on the
					unique identifier being unique to one and only one EPUB publication. Determining whether two
					EPUB publications with the same unique identifier represent different versions of the same
					publication, or different publications, may require inspecting other metadata, such as their last
					modification dates, titles, and authors.
			

			5.3 Metadata
				

				
					Whitespace
					
						Reading systems MUST strip and collapse ASCII whitespace [infra] from Dublin Core [dcterms] and meta element values
							[epub-33] before processing.
					

					The dc:identifier element
					
						To determine whether the value of a dc:identifier element [epub-33] conforms to an
							established system or has been granted by an issuing authority, reading systems SHOULD check
							for an identifier-type property
							[epub-33].
					

					The dc:title element
					
						Reading systems MUST recognize the first
							dc:title element [epub-33] in document order as the main title of the EPUB publication and present it to users before other title elements.
						This specification does not define how to process additional dc:title
							elements.
					

					The dc:language element
					
						The language(s) of the EPUB publication specified in dc:language elements are
							informational. Some uses of this information include:
						
							exposing it to the user through the reading system user interface
							using it to enhance functionality in a bookshelf (e.g., sorting by language)
							using it to optimize the reading interface (e.g., to preload text-to-speech
								languages)
						
						See 3.7 Internationalization for more details on how to determine the language of a
							publication resource.
					

					The dc:creator element
					
						When determining display
							priority, reading systems MUST use the document order of dc:creator elements [epub-33]
							in the metadata section, where the first creator element
							encountered is the primary creator. If a reading system exposes creator metadata to the
							user, it SHOULD include all the creators listed in the metadata section
							whenever possible (e.g., when not constrained by display considerations).
					

					The meta element
					
						Reading systems SHOULD ignore all meta elements whose property attributes
							[epub-33] define expressions they do not recognize. A reading system MUST NOT fail when encountering unknown
								expressions.
						If a reading system does not recognize the scheme attribute [epub-33] value, it SHOULD treat the value of
							the element as a string.
					

					The link element
					
						Retrieval and support of linked resources is OPTIONAL.
						The language identified in an hreflang [EPUB-33] attribute is
							purely advisory. The language information expressed in the resource determines its language
							for processing and rendering purposes, as defined in the internationalization requirements.
					
				
			

			5.4 Manifest
				

				Reading systems MUST ignore
					values of the properties
						attribute [epub-33] they do not recognize.

				Reading systems
					SHOULD NOT use linked resources in the rendering of an EPUB publication due to the inherent
					limitations and risks involved (e.g., lack of information about the resource and how to process it,
					security risks from remotely-hosted sources, lack of fallbacks, etc.).

				
					A reading system that does not support the MIME media
						type [rfc2046] of a given publication resource MUST traverse the manifest fallback chain [epub-33] until it
						identifies a supported publication resource to use in place of the unsupported resource. 
					If the reading system supports multiple
						publication resources in the fallback chain, it MAY select the resource to use based on the
						resource's properties attribute
						[epub-33] values, otherwise it SHOULD honor the EPUB creator's preferred
						fallback order.
					If a reading system does not support any resource
						in the fallback chain, it MUST alert the user that it could not display the content. 
				

				When manifest fallbacks [epub-33] are provided
					for top-level content documents, reading systems MAY choose from the available options to find
					the optimal version to render in a given context (e.g., by inspecting the properties attribute for
					each).

				A reading system MUST terminate the fallback chain at the
					first reference to a manifest item it has already encountered.
			

			5.5 Spine
				

				Reading systems MUST provide a means of
					rendering an EPUB publication in the order defined in the spine element [epub-33], which
					includes:
				
					recognizing the first primary (linear)
								itemref [epub-33] as the beginning of the default reading order;
						and,
					rendering successive primary items in the order given in the spine.
				

				When a user traverses the default reading order defined in
					the spine element, a reading system MAY automatically skip non-linear itemref elements
					[epub-33]. When a user activates a hyperlink to a non-linear
						resource, however, reading systems MUST render the referenced resource or a designated
						fallback. Reading systems MAY also provide the option for users to skip non-linear
					content by default or not.

				If the EPUB creator has not specified the page-progression-direction attribute [epub-33], the reading system MUST
					assume the value of default. When page-progression-direction value is
						default, the reading system can choose the rendering direction.

				If
					the page-progression-direction attribute has a value other than default,
					the reading system MUST ignore any directionality computed from pre-paginated XHTML content documents.

				Reading systems MUST ignore all
					values expressed in spine itemref
					properties attributes [EPUB-33] that
					they do not recognize.

				
					
						Reading systems MUST NOT skip spine references to duplicate manifest items [EPUB-33] when rendering the linear reading order.
					The reading
						system MUST treat these as distinct items for user interface (UI) purposes (for example, each
						occurrence could be independently bookmarked or annotated).
					When a reading system follows a hyperlink to a resource referenced multiple times in the spine,
						the reading system MUST navigate to the first occurrence of the document in the linear reading
						order.
				

				5.5.1 Spine overrides
					

					When a spine itemref element's properties attribute overrides a global rendering property [epub-33], reading
						systems MUST follow the requirements for the override's global value to display that spine
						item.

					For example, a spine item that contains the layout-pre-paginated override [epub-33] is rendered following the
						requirements of the global pre-paginated
							value.

					If
						more than one override for the same property is specified in a properties
						attribute, reading systems MUST use only the first value.
				
			

			5.6 Collections
				

				In the context of this specification, support for collections [epub-33] in reading systems is OPTIONAL. Reading systems
						MUST ignore collection elements that define unrecognized roles.
			

			5.7 Legacy features
				

				Reading systems MUST NOT support legacy
						features in content that conforms to this
						version of EPUB [epub-33].
			
		
		6. EPUB content document processing
			

			The definition of EPUB content documents [epub-33] includes
				various authoring restrictions to optimize the cross-compatibility of content (e.g., prohibiting CSS for setting language and direction
				[epub-33]). Unless stated otherwise in this specification, reading systems MAY support these
				restricted features.

			6.1 XHTML content documents
				

				Reading systems MUST
					process XHTML content documents [epub-33].

				Unless explicitly defined in this section as overridden, reading
					systems MUST process XHTML content documents using semantics defined by the [html] specification
					and honor any applicable user agent conformance constraints expressed therein.

				6.1.1 HTML extensions
					

					6.1.1.1 RDFa
						

						Reading system support for the attribute processing
								model [rdfa-core] is OPTIONAL.
					

					6.1.1.2 Content switching (deprecated)
						

						Use of the switch element is deprecated
							[epub-33]. Refer to its definition in [epubcontentdocs-301] for implementation
							information.
					

					6.1.1.3 The epub:trigger element (deprecated)
						

						Use of the trigger element is deprecated
							[epub-33]. Refer to its definition in [epubcontentdocs-301] for implementation
							information.
					

					6.1.1.4 Custom attributes
						

						Reading systems MAY support custom attributes provided the attributes do not modify the
							requirements of this specification.
					
				

				6.1.2 HTML deviations and constraints
					

					6.1.2.1 Microdata
						

						Reading system support for the attribute processing
								model is OPTIONAL, as is the conversion to JSON
							[html].
					

					6.1.2.2 MathML
						

						To support MathML [mathml3] embedded in XHTML content documents, a reading system:

						
							
								MUST be an input-compliant processor
									for Presentation MathML, as defined in the
									[mathml3] specification.
							
							
								MUST, if it has a
									viewport, support visual rendering of Presentation MathML.
							
							
								MAY support rendering of Content MathML found in annotation-xml elements [mathml3].
							
						

						NoteReading systems may choose to use third-party libraries such as MathJax to provide MathML rendering.
					

					6.1.2.3 Embedded SVG
						

						Reading systems MUST process SVG
							embedded in XHTML content documents as defined in 6.2 SVG content documents.

						6.1.2.3.1 Embedded SVG and CSS
							

							For the purposes of
								styling SVG embedded in XHTML content documents by reference, reading
								systems MUST NOT apply CSS style rules of the containing document to the referenced SVG
								document.

							For the purposes of
								styling SVG embedded in XHTML content documents by inclusion, reading systems
								MUST apply applicable CSS rules of the containing document to the included SVG
								elements.

							Note
								SVG included by reference is processed as a separate document, and can
									include its own CSS style rules just like an SVG content document would. Note
									that this is consistent with situations where an [html] object element references an external [html]
									element.
							
						
					

					6.1.2.4 Form submission
						

						Reading system support for the submission of [html] form elements is OPTIONAL. A
							reading system might, for example, prevent form submissions by limiting access to
							networking.
					
				
			

			6.2 SVG content documents
				

				Reading systems MUST
					process SVG content documents [epub-33].

				To process SVG content documents and SVG embedded in XHTML content
						documents, a reading system:

				
					
						MUST process SVG content documents
							using semantics defined by the [svg] specification, and honor any applicable user agent
							conformance constraints expressed therein, unless explicitly defined by this specification
							as overridden.
					
					
						MUST meet the
							conformance criteria defined in 6.4 Scripting.
					
					
						
							MUST, if it has a viewport,
								support the visual rendering of SVG using CSS as defined in Styling [svg] 
							and it SHOULD support all properties defined in the
									Property Index [svg]. 
							 In the case of embedded SVG,
								a reading system MUST also conform to the constraints defined in 6.1.2.3.1 Embedded SVG and CSS.
						
					
				
			

			6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)
				

				If a reading system has a viewport, it MUST support the
						visual rendering of XHTML content documents via CSS
					[epub-33].

				To support CSS, a reading system:

				
					
						MUST support the official definition of CSS as described in the
							[csssnapshot].
					
					
						SHOULD support all applicable modules in [csssnapshot] that
							have reached at least Candidate
								Recommendation status [w3cprocess] (and are widely implemented).
					
					
						MUST support [truetype],
							[opentype], [woff], and [woff2] font resources referenced from @font-face rules
							[css-fonts-4].
					
					
						SHOULD support all prefixed properties defined in CSS Style Sheets — Prefixed properties [epub-33].
					
					
						SHOULD apply EPUB creator style sheets as written to
							EPUB content documents.
					
					
						SHOULD NOT override the EPUB creator's style sheets, but SHOULD do
							so in a way that preserves the Cascade when necessary: through a user agent style sheet, or
							[html] style attributes.
					
					
						It MAY override parts of the EPUB creator's style sheet because
							of user interaction.
					
				

				In addition to supporting CSS properties as defined above, a reading
					system's user agent style sheet SHOULD support the [html] suggested
						default rendering.

				Reading system developers should implement CSS support at the level of major browsers and publicly
					document their user agent style sheets and how they interact with EPUB creator's style sheets.
			

			6.4 Scripting
				

				Reading systems SHOULD support scripting [epub-33].

				Reading system support for scripting depends on its usage context:

				
					
						Reading systems SHOULD support container-constrained
								scripting [epub-33] in reflowable EPUB content documents.
					
					
						Reading systems SHOULD support spine-level scripting [epub-33] in fixed-layout documents [epub-33].
					
					
						Reading systems SHOULD support spine-level scripting in
							reflowable EPUB content documents that use the "scrolled-doc" or "scrolled-continuous" [epub-33] presentation modes defined by the rendition:flow property. Similarly, if it
								supports spine-level scripting in reflowable EPUB content documents, it MUST implement
								the "scrolled-doc" presentation mode and SHOULD implement the
									"scrolled-continuous" presentation mode.
						
					
					
						Reading systems MAY support scripting in other
							contexts, but this specification does not address such scripting. As a result, the use of
							scripting in these contexts may not be consistent across reading systems.
					
				

				If a reading system supports scripting:

				
					
						It MAY render scripted content documents as an interactive,
							scripted user agent according to [html].
					

					
						
							It MUST assign a unique origin [html], shared by all spine-level scripts of the EPUB publication.
							That origin [html] MUST be unique for each
								user-specific instance of an EPUB publication in a reading system.
						
					

					
						
							 It MUST NOT allow a
								container-constrained script to modify the [dom] of the host EPUB content document or
								other contents in the EPUB publication  and  MUST NOT allow it to manipulate the
								size of its containing rectangle . (Note: Even if a script is not
							container-constrained, a reading system might impose restrictions on modifications. See the
								dom-manipulation feature.)
					
					
						It MAY place additional limitations on the capabilities
							provided to scripts during execution (e.g., limiting networking).
					
					
						It MUST extend the navigator object [html]
							with the epubReadingSystem interface defined in B. epubReadingSystem object. It also MUST support the
								dom-manipulation and layout-change features defined in B.4.1.2 Features in container-constrained scripting
							contexts.
					
				

				If a reading system does not support
					scripting, it MUST process fallbacks for scripted content as defined in Fallbacks for scripted content documents
					[epub-33].

				6.4.1 Local storage
					

					Reading systems MAY block scripts from saving persistent
						data through cookies and web storage [html].

					Reading systems that
						allow local storage [html] SHOULD provide methods for
						users to inspect or delete that data.
				

				6.4.2 Event model
					

					Reading systems SHOULD follow the DOM Event model as per [html] and pass UI events to the
						scripting environment before performing any default action associated with these events.

					Reading system developers must ensure that scripts cannot disable critical functionality (such as
						navigation) to constrain the extent to which a potentially malicious script could impact their reading systems. As a result, although
						the scripting environment should be able to cancel the default action of any event, some events
						either might not be passed through or might not be cancelable.
				

				6.4.3 Security considerationsThis section is non-normative.
					

					Reading system developers who also support scripting must be aware of the security issues that
						arise when reading systems execute scripted content. As the underlying scripting model employed
						by reading systems and browsers is the same, developers must take into consideration the same
						kinds of issues encountered in web contexts.

					Each reading system must establish if it can trust the scripts in a particular document. Reading
						systems should treat all scripts as untrusted (and potentially malicious), and developers should
						examine all vectors of attack and protect against them. In particular, developers should
						consider the following:

					
						
							an attack against the runtime environment (e.g., stealing files from a user's hard
								drive);
						
						
							an attack against the reading system itself (e.g., stealing a list of a user's books or
								causing unexpected behavior);
						
						
							an attack of one EPUB content document against another (e.g., stealing data that
								originated in a different document);
						
						
							an attack of an unencrypted script against an encrypted portion of a document (e.g., an
								injected malicious script extracting protected content);
						
						
							an attack against the local network (e.g., stealing data from a server behind a
								firewall).
						
					

					To limit the possible damage of untrusted scripts, this specification recommends that reading
						systems establish a unique origin [html] allocated to each
						EPUB publication (see 4.1.1 URL of the root directory). Assigning a unique origin ensures
						that spine-level scripts [epub-33] are isolated
						from other EPUB publications, and limits access to cookies [html], web storage [html], etc.

					Examples of web APIs that are tied to the concept of "origin" include web storage [html] and
						IndexedDB [indexeddb], which EPUB content documents can interact with via scripting. Reading
						systems that allow users to add/remove publications from a managed library (their "bookshelf")
						may maintain the publication's unique origin when the publication is removed and subsequently
						re-imported into the content library. Conversely, reading systems may create a new unique origin
						for every newly added publication.

					This specification also recommends that container-constrained scripts [epub-33] not be allowed to modify the DOM of the host
						EPUB content document and/or manipulate the containing rectangle (see 6.4 Scripting).

					Note that compliance with these recommendations does not guarantee protection from the possible
						attacks listed above; developers must examine each potential vulnerability within the context of
						their reading system.
				
			
		
		7. Navigation document processing
			

			Reading systems MUST process EPUB navigation documents [epub-33].

			To process the EPUB navigation document, a reading system:

			
				
					MUST provide users access to the links and headings in the toc nav element [epub-33].
				
				
					SHOULD, when
						generating non-HTML based navigation widgets, replace unsupported non-text elements in headings
						and labels with their alternative text [epub-33].
						If both alt and title attributes are present on an element, preference
						SHOULD be given to the alt attribute. If neither attribute is present, reading
						systems MAY provide their own text or ignore the element.
				
				
					SHOULD provide a method to navigate to the listed page breaks
						when a page-list nav element
						[epub-33] is present.
				
				
					MAY provide users access to the links in the landmarks nav element [epub-33] and
						MAY use the links to enable functionality in the application.
				
				
					MAY provide access to nav elements that do not specify
						an epub:type attribute or that declare an
							unknown value [epub-33].
				
				
					MUST relocate the current reading
						position to the destination identified by an activated link when the link is to a publication resource.
				
				
					MUST NOT show list item
						numbering on nav elements when presenting them outside of the spine, regardless of
						support for CSS, as the default display style of list items is equivalent to the list-style:
								none property [csssnapshot].).
				
			

			Reading systems MUST
				honor the above requirements irrespective of whether the EPUB navigation document is part of the spine.
		
		8. Layout rendering control processing
			

			8.1 Fixed-layout documents
				

				Reading systems MUST
					support the rendering of fixed-layout documents
					[epub-33].

				8.1.1 Fixed-layout properties
					

					8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property
						

						 The default
							value reflowable MUST be assumed by EPUB reading systems as the global value if
							no meta element carrying the rendition:layout
								property occurs in the package document
								metadata [epub-33].

						When the
								rendition:layout property is set to pre-paginated, reading
							systems MUST NOT include space between the adjacent content slots when rendering synthetic spreads.

						The rendition:layout property values have the following processing
							requirements:

						
							reflowable
							
								Reading systems MAY apply dynamic pagination when rendering.
							
							pre-paginated
							
								Reading systems MUST produce exactly one page per spine itemref [epub-33] when
									rendering.
							
						
					

					8.1.1.2 The rendition:orientation property
						

						The default value auto MUST be assumed by EPUB reading systems as the global
							value if no meta element carrying the rendition:orientation property occurs in the package document metadata [epub-33].

						The rendition:orientation property values have the following processing
							requirements:

						
							auto
							
								The reading system determines the orientation in which to render EPUB content documents.
							

							landscape
							
								Reading systems that support multiple orientations SHOULD render EPUB content
									documents in landscape orientation.
							

							portrait
							
								Reading systems that support multiple orientations SHOULD render EPUB content
									documents in portrait orientation.
							
						

						The means by which they convey the intent is implementation specific.
					

					8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property
						

						Reading
							Systems MUSt assume the default value auto as the global value if no meta
							element carrying the rendition:spread
							property occurs in the package document
								metadata [epub-33].

						The rendition:spread property values have the following processing
							requirements:

						
							none
							
								Reading systems MUST NOT incorporate spine items in a synthetic spread. Reading
									systems SHOULD create a single viewport positioned at the center of the
									screen.
							
							landscape
							
								Reading systems SHOULD render a synthetic spread for spine items only when the device
									is in landscape orientation.
							
							portrait (deprecated)
							
								Reading systems SHOULD treat the value "portrait" as a synonym of
										"both" and create spreads regardless of orientation.
							
							both
							
								Reading systems SHOULD render a synthetic spread regardless of device
									orientation.
							
							auto
							
								Reading systems MAY use synthetic spreads in specific or all device orientations as
									part of a content display area utilization optimization process.
							
						
					

					8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties
						

						
							The rendition:page-spread-left
									property [epub-33] indicates that the given spine item SHOULD be rendered in
								the left-hand slot of a spread.
							The rendition:page-spread-right
									property [epub-33] indicates that the given spine item SHOULD be rendered in
								the right-hand slot of a spread.
						

						The rendition:page-spread-left and rendition:page-spread-right
							properties apply to both pre-paginated and reflowable content, and they only apply when the
							reading system is creating synthetic spreads.

						The
								rendition:page-spread-* properties MUST take precedence over whatever value
							of the page-break-before property [csssnapshot] has been set for an
							XHTML content document.

						When a reflowable spine item follows a pre-paginated one, the reflowable one SHOULD start
							on the next page — as defined by the page-progression-direction attribute [epub-33] — when it
							lacks a rendition:page-spread-* property value.

						Reading systems MUST honor
								rendition:page-spread-* properties on both reflowable and pre-paginated
							spine items (e.g., by inserting a blank page).

						When a pre-paginated
							spine item follows a reflowable one, the pre-paginated one SHOULD start on the next page (as
							defined by the page-progression-direction attribute) when it lacks a
								rendition:page-spread-* property value.

						When a reading
							system encounters two spine items that represent a true spread (i.e., two adjacent spine
							items with the rendition:page-spread-left and
								rendition:page-spread-right properties), it SHOULD create the spread with
							no space between the adjacent pages.
					
				

				8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions
					

					
						XHTML
						
							
								Reading systems MUST create the initial
									containing block (ICB) using the width and height expressions declared in the
										viewport meta tag for XHTML content documents, as defined in Expressing in HTML [epub-33].
								They MUST clip content
									positioned outside of the ICB.
							
							If the width or
								height values in the viewport meta tag contain a non-numeric character but
								start with a number (e.g., the value includes a unit of length declaration such as
								"500px"), the number prefix SHOULD be used as the pixel value, otherwise the value MUST
								be treated as invalid.
							
								Reading systems SHOULD attempt to extract width and height
								values from a viewport meta tag even if its syntax is invalid. 
							 Reading systems MUST use the first
								declaration of a width and height property in a viewport
									meta tag (i.e., ignore repeated declarations). 
							 If the viewport meta does not contain a width or a height value, or if
								these values are invalid, reading systems MAY supply the values. For example, a reading
								system may: 
							
								consider these as having the values device-width and
										device-height, respectively; or
								look for the previous content document in the spine, if applicable, and use the
									ICB value defined there; or
								consider the content document as erroneous XHTML content altogether.
							
							If an XHTML content document contains
								more than one viewport meta tags, reading systems MUST use the first in
								document order to obtain the height and width dimensions. Subsequent declarations MUST
								be ignored.
							When the ICB aspect ratio does not match the aspect
								ratio of the reading system content display area, reading systems MAY position the
								ICB inside the area to accommodate the user interface; in other words, added
								letter-boxing space MAY appear on either side (or both) of the content.
						

						SVG
						
							Reading systems MUST create
								the initial containing block (ICB) using the dimensions as defined in Expressing the ICB in SVG [epub-33] to
								render SVG content documents. 
							Note When the ICB aspect ratio does not match
								the aspect ratio of the reading system content display area, reading systems should
								follow the rules for the viewBox and the preserveAspectRatio attributes, as defined in [SVG]. 
						
					
				

				8.1.3 Viewport rendering
					

					When rendering fixed-layout documents, the default intent is that the content display area SHOULD occupy as much of the available viewport area as possible. Reading systems
						SHOULD NOT inject additional content such as border, margins, headers, or footers into the
						viewport.

					Note
						This specification does not define how the initial
								containing block [css2] is placed within the reading system content display
								area.
					

					Note
						The exposure of reading system control widgets to the user is implementation-specific and not
							included in the above behavioral expectations.
					
				
			

			8.2 Reflowable layouts
				

				Reading systems SHOULD process the reflowable layout properties [epub-33].

				8.2.1 The rendition:flow property
					

					If a reading system supports the specified rendering, it SHOULD use that method to handle
						overflow content, but MAY provide the option for users to override the requested rendering.

					The default global value is auto if no meta element carrying this
						property occurs in the metadata
							section [epub-33]. Reading systems MAY support only this default value.

					The rendition:flow property values have the following processing requirements:

					
						paginated
						
							The reading system SHOULD dynamically paginate all overflow content.
						

						scrolled-continuous
						
							The reading system SHOULD render all EPUB content documents such that overflow
								content is scrollable, and SHOULD present the EPUB publication as one continuous
								scroll from spine item to spine item (except where locally overridden [epub-33]).
						

						scrolled-doc
						
							The reading system SHOULD render all EPUB content documents such that users can scroll
								overflow content, and SHOULD present each spine item as a separate scrollable
								document.
						

						auto
						
							The reading system MAY render overflow content using its default method or a user
								preference, whichever is applicable.
						
					

					For the rendition:flow-scrolled-continuous property, the scroll direction MUST be
						defined relative to the block flow direction of the root element of the XHTML content document referenced by the itemref element [epub-33]. The scroll direction MUST be
						vertical if the block flow direction is downward (top-to-bottom). It MUST be horizontal if the
						block flow direction of the root element is rightward (left-to-right) or leftward
						(right-to-left).

					Reading systems MUST ignore the rendition:flow property and its overrides when
						processing pre-paginated spine
							items [epub-33].

					Note Reading system developers may decide to disregard this restriction, and accept the
							scrolled-continuous value of rendition:flow as a switch to display
						each pre-paginated spine item on a long, vertical strip (making it is easier to read on a
						smartphone or computer). This type of presentation is often referred to as "webtoons". Some
						publishers already use this possibility. After some further experimentation and incubation, a
						future version of this specification may introduce this approach as a standard feature for
						fixed-layout documents. See also the (deferred) github issue 2412. 
				

				8.2.2 The rendition:align-x-center property
					

					When the rendition:align-x-center property is set on a
						spine item, reading systems SHOULD render the content centered horizontally within the
						viewport or spread, as applicable. This property does not affect the rendering of the spine
						item, only the placement of the resulting content box.

					For reflowable content,
						reading systems that support this property MUST center each virtual page.

					This specification does not define a default rendering behavior when reading systems do not
						support this property or EPUB creators do not specify it. Reading systems MAY render spine
						items by their own design.
				
			

			8.3 The viewport meta tag
				

				Except when obtaining the initial
					containing block dimensions for fixed-layout documents, reading systems MUST ignore rendering
					instructions in viewport meta
					declarations.

				This restriction applies to both fixed-layout and reflowable documents.
			

			8.4 Custom properties
				

				Reading systems MAY support custom properties provided they do not introduce expressions that
					conflict behaviorally with the properties defined in the Package rendering vocabulary
					[epub-33].
			
		
		9. Media overlays processing
			

			Reading systems with the capability to
				render prerecorded audio SHOULD support media overlays
				[epub-33].

			
				If a reading system does not support media overlays, it MUST ignore both:
				
					the media-overlay attribute
						on manifest item elements [epub-33]; and
					item elements where the media-type attribute value equals
							application/smil+xml.
				
			

			9.1 Loading the media overlay
				

				When a reading
					system loads a package document, it MUST refer to the manifest item
					elements' [epub-33] media-overlay attributes to discover the corresponding media
					overlays for EPUB content documents.

				
					Reading systems
						MUST support playback for XHTML content documents, and
					MAY support SVG content documents.
				

				
					
						Playback MUST start at the media overlay element which corresponds to the desired EPUB content
						document starting point. Note that the start of an EPUB content document could correspond to an
						element at the start or in the middle of a media overlay. 
					 When the media
						overlay document finishes playing, the reading system SHOULD load the next EPUB content document
						(as specified in the package document spine) and also load its corresponding
						media overlay document, provided that one is given. 
				
			

			9.2 Basic playback
				

				9.2.1 Timing and synchronization
					

					Reading systems MUST render immediate children of the body element [epub-33] in a
						sequence. A seq element's [epub-33] children MUST be rendered in sequence, and playback
						completes when the last child finishes playing. Reading system MUST render a par element's
						[epub-33] children in parallel (with each starting at the same time), and playback completes
						when all the children finish playing. Reading system playback of the media overlay document
						completes when the body element's last child finishes playing.
				

				9.2.2 Rendering audio
					

					When presented with a media overlay
						audio element [EPUB-33], reading systems MUST play the audio resource referenced by the
							src attribute, starting at the clip offset time given by the clipBegin attribute and ending
						at the clip offset time given by the clipEnd attribute [epub-33].

					In addition:

					
						
							If the EPUB creator has not specified a clipBegin attribute, reading
								systems MUST assume the value "0".
						
						
							If the EPUB creator has not specified a clipEnd attribute, reading systems
								MUST assume the value to be the full duration of the physical media.
						
						
							If the value of clipEnd exceeds the full duration of the physical media,
								reading systems MUST assume its value to be the full duration of the physical media.
						
					

					User-controllable audio playback options SHOULD include timescale modification, in which the user
						can alter the playback rate without distorting the pitch. The suggested range is half-speed to
						double-speed.
				

				9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements
					

					When presented with a media overlay text element [epub-33] whose src attribute
						contains a URL-fragment string referencing a specific part of an EPUB content document,
						reading systems SHOULD ensure the referenced portion is visible in the viewport. In addition
						to [html] element ID references and SVG Fragment
							Identifiers [svg], reading systems MAY support other fragment identifier schemes.

					During media overlays playback, reading systems with a viewport SHOULD add the class names
						given by the metadata properties active-class and playback-active-class [epub-33] to the appropriate elements, when
						specified, in the EPUB content document. Conversely, the class names SHOULD be removed when
						the playback state changes, as described in Associating style information [epub-33].

					The active-class and playback-active-class metadata properties are
						OPTIONAL, and if omitted, reading system behavior is implementation-specific.

					Reading system behavior when a fragment
							identifier [epub-33] does not reference an element is also
						implementation-specific.
				
			

			9.3 Interacting with the EPUB content document
				

				NoteEarlier versions of this specification included some information about embedded audio
					and video [epubmediaoverlays-32]. This feature has been deprecated.

				9.3.1 Navigation
					

					Because the media overlay is closely linked to
						the EPUB content document, it is very easy for reading systems to locate a position in the
						EPUB content document based on the current position in the media overlay playback. If the user
						pauses synchronized playback and navigates to a different part of the EPUB publication,
						synchronized playback MUST resume at that point. For example, if a specific page number in the
						EPUB content document is the desired location, then this same point is located in the media
						overlay and playback started there.

					This same approach allows for synchronizing the media overlay playback with user selection of a
						navigation point in the EPUB navigation document. The reading system loads the media overlay
						for that file and finds the correct point for starting playback based on the ID of the
						navigation point target.

					Note
						EPUB creators may associate a media overlay document directly with an EPUB
								navigation document in order to provide synchronized playback of its contents,
							regardless of whether the XHTML content document in which it resides is included in the
							spine. See EPUB navigation
								document [epub-33] for more information.
					

					Note
						EPUB creators may associate media overlay document elements with EPUB content document
							structures such as tables. Reading systems should ensure that media overlay playback remains
							synchronized with user navigation of table rows and cells. The reading system might also
							play the corresponding table header preceding the contents of the cell.
					
				

				9.3.2 Embedded audio and video (deprecated)
					
					Guidance for automatic playback of embedded audio and video is now deprecated.
					Refer to its definition in [epubmediaoverlays-32] for more information.
				

				9.3.3 Text-to-speech
					

					When a media overlay
						text element with no audio [epub-33] sibling element references text within the target
						EPUB content document, reading systems capable of text-to-speech (TTS) playback SHOULD
						render the referenced text using TTS.

					Reading systems SHOULD use the speech-related information provided in the target EPUB content
						document to play the audio stream as part of the media overlay rendering.

					Note
						See EPUB 3 Text-to-Speech Support [epub-tts-10] for more
							information about supporting TTS technologies in EPUB publications.
					

					The media overlay text element's lifespan corresponds to the rendering time of the
						associated speech synthesis. The implicit duration of the text element (and by
						inference, of the parent par element) is therefore determined by the execution of
						the Text-to-Speech engine, and cannot be known at authoring time (factors like speech rate,
						pauses and other prosody parameters influence the audio output). This also means that reading
						systems should treat the duration property
						values set in the package document as approximative when making use of them.
				
			

			9.4 Skippability and escapability
				

				9.4.1 Skippability
					

					Reading systems SHOULD use the semantic information provided by media
						overlay elements' epub:type attribute to offer users the option of skipping content.

					When skipping of content is enabled, reading systems MUST suppress
						playback of any par and seq elements whose epub:type
						attribute contains a semantic that matches a skippable structure.
				

				9.4.2 Escapability
					

					
						While playing media overlays, reading systems SHOULD offer users
							the option to leave ("escape") escapable
								structures [epub-33], which are determined by the presence of an epub:type
							attribute [epub-33] with a value from the escapable structures list.
						If a user opts to escape from an escapable structure, then the
							reading system MUST continue playback with the next sequential element after the
							structure.
					
				
			
		
		10. Processing structural semantics
			

			Reading systems MAY support
					structural semantics [epub-33] in EPUB
					content documents.

			When processing the epub:type attribute, a reading system:

			
				
					MAY obtain an expanded URL for each value.
				
				
					MUST ignore the
						terms if used on an element whose usage is not allowed in the definition of
						epub:type [epub-33].
				
				
					MAY associate behaviors with none, some,
						or all of the terms defined in the default
							vocabulary [epub-33].
				
				
					MAY associate behaviors with terms from other vocabularies.
				
			
		
		11. Processing property values
			

			Reading systems MAY support the vocabulary association mechanisms for processing property data type values
				[epub-33].

			This section defines an algorithm for obtaining an expanded URL from a property data type
				value. It applies only to reading systems that support the [epub-33] vocabulary association
				mechanisms.

			Reading systems that do not support the [epub-33] vocabulary association mechanisms MAY process
					property values as plain string values [infra]. It is not required to support the
				expansion of these values to URLs to add reading system behaviors based on their presence.

			The algorithm describes the process using the terminology and data types defined in [infra], and, if
				successful, results in a string value with the expanded URL being returned. A null value is returned for invalid properties.

			This algorithm takes the following arguments:

			
				value: the property value to process.
				attr: the name of the attribute that contains value.
				elem: the name of the element that attr is attached to.
				doc: the document being processed (e.g., package document, media overlay document, epub content document).
			

			To obtain an expanded URL, apply the following steps:

			
				
					Let baseURL, expandedURL, propertyPrefix, and
							propertyReference be empty strings.
					
						Explanation
						In this algorithm:
						
							baseURL will hold the base URL associated with the value, whether this URL is
								assigned by the EPUB creator, corresponds to a default vocabulary, or comes from a
								reserved prefix.
							expandedURL will hold the final URL that results from the concatenation of
								the base URL and property reference.
							propertyPrefix will hold the property's prefix [epub-33] (i.e., the value
								before the colon). Properties from a default vocabulary will not have a prefix, but all
								others will.
							propertyReference will hold the property's reference [epub-33] (i.e., the
								value after the prefix). All valid properties require a reference.
						
					
				
				
					Obtain the values of propertyPrefix and propertyReference as follows:
					
						
							If value does not contain a colon (U+003A), set propertyReference
								to value.
							
								Explanation
								If a property value does not have a colon, it does not have a prefix. In
									this case, the value is drawn from the default vocabulary as described in the next
									step of the algorithm.
							
						
						
							Otherwise, if value begins with a colon, the value is invalid. Return null.
							
								Explanation
								A colon at the beginning of the value is invalid as it indicates the prefix is not
									set.
							
						
						
							Otherwise, split value on the first colon and set propertyPrefix to
								the string before the colon and set propertyReference to the string after the
								colon.
						
					
					If propertyReference is not a valid path-relative-scheme-less-URL string, as
						required by the property data type
							definition [epub-33], the value is invalid. Return null.
					
						Explanation
						The path-relative-scheme-less-URL string definition has a number of restrictions that apply
							to the reference whether it has a prefix or not.
						For example, the reference must not begin with a URL-scheme string followed by a colon.
							This restriction means that the following is not a valid property value as the
							second colon could represent a scheme: foo:bar:baz/qux.
						There are also restrictions on what characters must be percent encoded.
					
				
				
					Obtain the value of baseURL as follows:
					
						
							If propertyPrefix is an empty string:
							
								If attr is epub:type [epub-33], set baseURL to
										http://idpf.org/epub/vocab/structure/#
								Otherwise, if elem is the package document meta element [epub-33]
									and attr is scheme, the property value is invalid. Return null.
								Otherwise, if elem is the package document meta element [epub-33],
									set baseURL to
										http://idpf.org/epub/vocab/package/meta/#
								Otherwise, if elem is the package document link element [epub-33],
									set baseURL to
										http://idpf.org/epub/vocab/package/link/#
								Otherwise, if elem is the package document item element [epub-33],
									set baseURL to
										http://idpf.org/epub/vocab/package/item/#
								Otherwise, if elem is the package document itemref element
									[epub-33], set baseURL to
										http://idpf.org/epub/vocab/package/itemref/#
							
							
								Explanation
								If the property value does not have a prefix, then this step assigns the
									default vocabulary URL to use based on the attribute or element to which it belongs.
									When an element in the package document has more than one attribute that takes a
										property data type, those attributes share the same default
									vocabulary. For this reason, it is not necessary to check both the element and
									attribute to determine what URL to assign.
								The one attribute in EPUB 3 that does not have a default vocabulary is the scheme attribute
									[epub-33]. A scheme value without a prefix is invalid.
							
						
						
							Otherwise:
							
								
									If a prefix attribute is declared on the document element of
											doc, and the attribute contains a prefix that matches
											propertyPrefix, set baseURL to the URL associated with
										the prefix declaration.
								
								
									Otherwise, if propertyPrefix matches a reserved prefix [epub-33]
										for doc, set baseURL to the URL associated with the
										reserved prefix.
								
							
							
								Explanation
								When a property value has a prefix, the first place to check for its
									base URL is in a prefix attribute declaration on the document
									element.
								If the author has not assigned a URL for the prefix, the next step is to check if the
									prefix matches one of the reserved prefixes.
								Note that author-assigned prefix URLs override the reserved prefix URLs.
							
						
					
					If baseURL is an empty string, the property value is invalid. Return null.
					
						Explanation
						If the base URL is empty at the end of this processing step, then either the prefix is not
							mapped or reserved, or the element or attribute being processed does not accept
								property data types as defined in [epub-33].
						Without a base URL, it is impossible to generate an expanded URL, so the value is
							invalid.
					
				
				Set expandedURL to the concatenated values of baseURL and
						propertyReference. Do not add a separator when concatenating the values.
				
					If expandedURL is not a valid URL string, the value is invalid. Return null.
					Otherwise, return expandedURL.
					
						Explanation
						Although an expanded value may be obtained, it is not necessarily the case that it is a valid
							URL. This is only likely to occur when the EPUB creator assigns an invalid base URL to a
							prefix.
					
				
			

			Note
				Reading systems do not have to parse the resulting URL [url] or attempt to
					dereference the resulting expanded URL. Expanding a property data type value to a full
					URL only ensures a reading system has encountered the value it expects (i.e., because different EPUB
					creators can assign the same prefix to different URLs, two values may appear the same until
					expanded).
			
		
		12. Backward compatibility
			

			Reading systems MUST attempt to
				process an EPUB publication whose package document version attribute [epub-33] is less
				than "3.0".

			EPUB publications with older version numbers will not always render exactly
				as intended unless processed according to their respective specifications. Reading systems SHOULD
				support such EPUB publications as defined by those specifications.
		
		13. Forward compatibility
			

			Reading systems SHOULD attempt to process an EPUB publication whose
				package document version attribute
				[epub-33] is greater than "3.0".
		
		14. AccessibilityThis section is non-normative.
			

			Although the primary focus of this specification is on how to process and render EPUB publications,
				it does not mandate specific user interfaces that all reading systems must offer. This does not mean
				that there are not common accessibility issues that all reading systems developers should be aware of,
				or seek to avoid in their applications.

			The W3C's User Agent Accessibility Guidelines [uaag20] provides many useful practices developers should
				apply to improve their reading systems as many browser accessibility issues have parallels in
				EPUB-specific user agents.

			The following list outlines some additional EPUB-specific areas where a lack of accessibility impacts the
				reading experience for users:

			
				Bookshelf — Ensure that the process for accessing and opening the user's content is
					accessible. For example, do not rely on a visual-only display like cover images. Exposing text
					representations of the title(s) and author(s), including the language they are expressed in, allows
					assistive technologies to properly announce the content.
				User Interface Controls — Ensure that all controls (e.g., search boxes, annotation controls,
					and buttons to load features such as the table of contents) are exposed to assistive technologies
					and that their actions do not rely on specific modalities (e.g., they only operate through touch or
					a mouse).
				Search — Search access to the full text content of all EPUB content documents is necessary
					to ensure users can locate information easily.
				Display Control — Provide methods for users to tailor the styling of the content to their
					preferences (e.g., to change and increase fonts, increase line and word spacing, and apply alternate
					contrasts).
				Zoom — Allow users to zoom the content to better size it to their needs, especially for
					fixed-layout documents.
				Reading Control — Ensure that the ability to read from page-to-page and document-to-document
					does not depend on physical interaction (i.e., users of assistive technologies can read the content
					without getting trapped at the end of pages or documents).
				API Integration — Ensure that the accessibility tree, including support for roles, states and
					properties [wai-aria-11], is exposed to the underlying operating system's accessibility API so
					that users can fully interact with the content when using assistive technologies.
				Document Object Model (DOM) — Provide access to the [dom] of EPUB content documents so that
					users can investigate the semantics and structure expressed in the source.
				Table of Contents — Ensure that users can access the link text, including text alternatives for visual content. Activating the
					table of contents links should be possible using different inputs.
			

			The DAISY Consortium maintains an accessibility test suite
				to aid in evaluating these issues and more.
		
		15. Security and privacy
			

			15.1 OverviewThis section is non-normative.
				

				The particularity of an EPUB publication is its structure. The EPUB format provides a means of
					representing, packaging, and encoding structured and semantically enhanced web content — including
					HTML, CSS, SVG, and other resources — for distribution in a single-file container.

				For reading systems, this means that the security and privacy issues are primarily based on the
					features of those formats, and closely mirror the threats presented by web content generally.

				Reading system developers also have a dual responsibility of both ensuring the security and privacy
					of their applications and helping limit the threats to users from the content that renders within
					them. The rest of this section explores the risk model of EPUB 3 with the aim of helping developers
					recognize and mitigate these risks.

				Note
					For the risks associated with the authoring of EPUB publications, refer to the security and privacy section of
						[epub-33].
				
			

			15.2 Threat modelThis section is non-normative.
				

				The greatest threats to users come from the content they
						read [epub-33], and the first line of defense against these attacks is the reading systems
					they use. Users expect that reading systems act as safeguards against malicious content and are
					often unaware that EPUB publications are susceptible to the same security risks as web
					sites.

				But although reading systems are relied on to provide security and privacy, they can also pose
					unintended threats to users depending on how information is handled. Tracking user information to
					optimize experiences is a common need, for example, but done without user permission and reading
					systems can run afoul of legal privacy requirements.

				This section outlines some of the key threats that reading system developers must take into
					consideration, with further details and recommendations in the following sections.

				
					Scripting
					
						Malicious scripts present several attack vectors against reading systems. If local storage is
							not secure, for example, they can attempt to compromise the user's data. Provided with
							network access, they may attempt unauthorized collection of user data.
						More detailed discussion of these issues and how to mitigate them is provided in 6.4.3 Security considerations.
					

					Malicious content
					
						 EPUB publications may contain resources designed to exploit security flaws in reading
							systems or the operating systems they run on. Attackers may also try to gain access to
							remote resources using file indirection techniques, such as symbolic links or file
							aliases. 
						The lack of a standard method of signing EPUB publications means that reading systems cannot
							always verify whether the content has been tampered with between authoring and loading in
							the device.
					

					Remote resources
					
						Remote resources present the same risks as any EPUB publication loaded from an untrusted
							source. Even if the publisher of the EPUB publication is trusted, remote resources may be
							compromised.
						Calls to remote resources can also be used to track information about users (e.g., through
							server logs). Reading systems should limit the information they expose through HTTP requests
							to only what is essential to obtain the resource.
						The origin of an EPUB is both unknown to the EPUB creator and specific to each reading system implementation. Consequently, if the EPUB
							creator hosts remote resources on a web server they control, the server effectively cannot
							use security features that require specifying allowable origins, such as headers for CORS, Content-Security-Policy, or X-Frame-Options.
					

					External links
					
						Like remote resources, external links may be used to trick unwitting users into opening
							malicious resources on the web designed to exploit the reading system or operating
							system.
						Likewise, reading systems should also avoid exposing potentially identifying information
							about users through the traversal of links (e.g., not using tracking identifiers or exposing
							unnecessary information about the user's environment).
					

					User-generated content
					
						User-generated content within a reading experience, for example through text areas or other
							interactive components, could pose a threat to reading system security or user privacy if
							the content is not properly secured. More details on scripting security are provided in 6.4.3 Security considerations.
					

					Collection of user data
					
						Collecting information about the user and their reading habits without obtaining their
							permission can violate their privacy, even if the information is only intended for internal
							use.
						Attempting to profile users based on their reading habits or through metadata in their
							publication (e.g., accessibility preferences) can expose users to unintended harms.
					
				

				Additionally, the security considerations that apply to [xml] and [zip] files also apply to the
						package document and the Open Container Format, respectively. See the "Security
					Consideration" sections of the Media Type registrations for the application/oebps-package+xml and the application/epub+zip formats for further details.
			

			15.3 Recommendations
				

				The strongest measure that reading system developers can take for privacy is to specify the data they
					intend to collect and use about the user and/or their reading behavior and seek the consent of users
					to obtain it. They SHOULD also allow personalization and control over this information.

				If a reading system allows users to store persistent data, especially personally identifiable
					information, it SHOULD treat that data as sensitive and not allow access to it by third parties.

				It is understood that the collection of some user data may be required for the sale, delivery, and
					operation of an EPUB publication, particularly on platforms where the sale of an EPUB
					publication and the method of reading it are connected. In these cases, the reading system SHOULD
					identify the data being collected, how it is used, and allow for user opt-outs (retailers may choose
					to inform users by other means, however, such as when a user creates an account on their web site).
					Anonymization of any collected data is RECOMMENDED for the privacy and the security of the user and
					reading system.

				It is also understood that user data may be required or helpful for some reading system affordances.
					In these cases, anonymization is also RECOMMENDED. Reading systems also SHOULD inform users of what
					data is needed, what it is to be used for, and to provide methods to opt-out.

				Content processors — defined as entities that handle the ingestion of EPUB content for
					distribution, display, or sale — also need to be aware of the potential risks in ingestion. It
					is advised that content processors check content for malicious content on ingestion, in addition to
					the validation steps that usually occur. This could include running virus scans, validating external
					links and remote resources, and other precautions.

				Reading systems SHOULD
					treat content from any new source, including from an integrated bookstore, as insecure (e.g., prompt
					users to allow scripting and network access the first time the source is accessed). If a reading
					system allows users to load their own content (e.g., through the process of "sideloading"), each
					instance SHOULD be treated as insecure. 

				When processing XML documents, a reading system SHOULD NOT resolve external identifiers in DOCTYPE, ENTITY and NOTATION declarations [xml]. Reading systems
					SHOULD also consider security risks related to internal or
						external XML entities like, for example, DoS attacks
					also known as "Billion laughs
						attacks" or "XML external
						entity attacks". 

				Note
					Additional security recommendations for external links, network access and scripting are
						available in 3.9 External links, 3.8 Network access, and 6.4.3 Security considerations, respectively.
				
			
		
		A. Unsupported features
			

			reading systems MAY support deprecated
					features [epub-33].

			Note
				Developers should consider the unlikelihood of encountering content with deprecated features before
					adding new support for them.
			
		
		B. epubReadingSystem object
			

			NoteReading systems act as the core rendering engines of EPUB publications and provide a
				scripting environment based on the [dom] specification. So, although this interface definition uses
				the [webidl] notation for implementation by reading systems, web browsers generally do not have to
				implement these objects.

			B.1 Interface definition
				

				This specification extends the Navigator object [html] as follows.

				WebIDL[Exposed=(Window)]
interface EpubReadingSystem {
    boolean hasFeature(DOMString feature, optional DOMString version);
};

partial interface Navigator {
    [LegacyUnforgeable, SameObject] readonly attribute EpubReadingSystem epubReadingSystem;
};

				Note
					This specification does not define an epubReadingSystem property extension for the
						WorkerNavigator object [html]. Reading systems therefore do not have to expose the
							epubReadingSystem object in the scripting context of Workers, and EPUB creators cannot rely on its presence.
				
			

			B.2 Description
				

				The Navigator.epubReadingSystem object provides an interface
					through which a scripted content document can query information about a user's reading
					system.


				Reading systems MUST expose the epubReadingSystem object on the navigator
					object of all loaded scripted content documents, including any nested container-constrained scripting
						contexts [epub-33]. Reading systems MUST ensure that the epubReadingSystem
					object is available no later than when the DOMContentLoaded
						event is triggered [html].

				Note
					Reading systems implementations may create cloned instances of the epubReadingSystem
						object in scripted content documents for technical feasibility reasons. In such cases, the
						reading system must ensure they consistently maintain the object's state — as reflected by the
						values of its properties and methods — across all copied instances.
				
			

			B.3 Properties
				

				This specification used to define the name, version, and the
						layoutStyle properties, but these are now deprecated [epub-33]. For more information refer to their definitions
					in [epubcontentdocs-32] (for name and version) and in [epubcontentdocs-301] (for layoutStyle).
			

			B.4 Methods
				

				B.4.1 hasFeature
					

					B.4.1.1 Description
						

						The hasFeature method returns a
							boolean value indicating whether the reading system supports any version of the specified
							feature, or undefined if the reading system does not recognize the specified
							feature.

						The optional version parameter allows EPUB creators to query custom features
							that could change in incompatible ways over time. The return value indicates support only
							for the specified version of the feature.

						Features defined in this specification are
							versionless. If a reading system supports a feature defined in this specification, it MUST
							ignore any supplied version parameter and return a true value.

						
    Example 1: JavaScript function to display support for scripted manipulation of the DOM
  
							var feature = "dom-manipulation";

var conformTest = navigator.epubReadingSystem.hasFeature(feature);

alert("Feature " + feature + " supported?: " + conformTest);
						
					

					B.4.1.2 Features
						

						The
							following table lists the set of features that reading systems that support the
								epubReadingSystem object MUST recognize. When the features are queried from
							the hasFeature method, reading systems MUST return a boolean value indicating
							their support.

						
							
								
									Name
									Description
								
							
							
								
									
										dom-manipulation
									
									Scripts may make structural changes to the document’s DOM (applies to spine-level scripting [epub-33]
										only).
								
								
									
										layout-changes
									
									Scripts may modify attributes and CSS styles that affect content layout (applies
										to spine-level scripting
										[epub-33] only).
								
								
									
										touch-events
									
									The device supports touch events, and the reading system passes touch events to
										the content.
								
								
									
										mouse-events
									
									The device supports mouse events, and the reading system passes mouse events to
										the content.
								
								
									
										keyboard-events
									
									The device supports keyboard events, and the reading system passes keyboard
										events to the content.
								
								
									
										spine-scripting
									
									Indicates whether the reading system supports spine-level scripting [epub-33]
										(e.g., so a container-constrained script [epub-33] can determine whether any
										actions that depend on scripting support in a top-level content document
										have any chance of success before attempting them).
								
							
						

						Reading system developers MAY add additional features, but future versions of this
							specification could append to this list in ways that might conflict or be incompatible with
							any such custom additions.
					
				
			
		
		C. IndexC.1 Terms defined by this specification
    
    
    
      content display area 
    §1.2
      epubReadingSystem 
    §B.
      EpubReadingSystem interface
    §B.1
      hasFeature method for EpubReadingSystem
    §B.4.1.1
      Navigator.epubReadingSystem attribute for Navigator
    §B.2
      obtain an expanded URL 
    §11.
  
  C.2 Terms defined by reference
    
    
    
        [BIDI] defines the following:
        
          
    Rule P2
  
    the higher-level protocols
  
        
      
        [CSS-FONTS-4] defines the following:
        
          
    @font-face rules
  
        
      
        [EPUB-33] defines the following:
        
          
    "scrolled-continuous"
  
    "scrolled-doc"
  
    active-class
  
    alternative text
  
    application/epub+zip
  
    application/oebps-package+xml
  
    Associating style information
  
    audio element
  
    audio core media type resources
  
    body element
  
    clipBegin
  
    clipEnd
  
    collections
  
    container root URL
  
    container-constrained scripting
  
    content they read
  
    content URL
  
    core specification
  
    CSS Style Sheets — Prefixed properties
  
    dc:creator element
  
    dc:identifier element
  
    dc:language element
  
    dc:title element
  
    declare an unknown value
  
    definition of epub:type
  
    deprecated
  
    dir
  
    disallowed
  
    duration
  
    EPUB container
  
    EPUB content documents
  
    EPUB content documents
  
    EPUB creators
  
    EPUB manifest
  
    EPUB navigation document
  
    EPUB navigation document
  
    EPUB navigation documents
  
    EPUB publications
  
    EPUB reading system
  
    EPUB spine
  
    epub:type attribute
  
    escapable structures
  
    Expressing in HTML
  
    Expressing the ICB in SVG
  
    Fallbacks for scripted content documents
  
    file name and file path restrictions
  
    fixed-layout document
  
    fixed-layout documents
  
    Font obfuscation
  
    foreign resource
  
    foreign resources
  
    fragment identifier
  
    global rendering property
  
    hreflang attributes
  
    identifier-type property
  
    image core media type resources
  
    item element
  
    itemref element
  
    landmarks nav element
  
    layout-pre-paginated override
  
    legacy features
  
    link element
  
    linked records
  
    linked resources
  
    links and headings
  
    locally overridden
  
    manifest fallback chain
  
    manifest items
  
    manifest.xml file
  
    media overlay documents
  
    media overlays
  
    media-overlay attribute
  
    meta element
  
    metadata.xml files
  
    OCF abstract container
  
    OCF ZIP container
  
    package document
  
    package document
  
    package document metadata
  
    page-list nav element
  
    page-progression-direction attribute
  
    par element
  
    Parsing URLs in the META-INF directory
  
    playback-active-class
  
    prefix
  
    primary (linear) itemref
  
    prohibiting CSS for setting language and direction
  
    properties attribute
  
    properties attribute
  
    properties attributes
  
    property attributes
  
    property data type values
  
    publication resources
  
    publication resources
  
    reference
  
    reflowable layout properties
  
    remote resources
  
    rendition:layout property
  
    rendition:orientation property
  
    rendition:page-spread-left property
  
    rendition:page-spread-right property
  
    rendition:spread
  
    Reserved files
  
    reserved prefix
  
    Resource locations
  
    root directory
  
    rootfile element
  
    scheme attribute
  
    scripted content documents
  
    scripting
  
    security and privacy section
  
    seq element
  
    signatures.xml file
  
    spine element
  
    spine-level scripting
  
    structural semantics
  
    SVG content documents
  
    SVG content documents
  
    synthetic spreads
  
    terminology defined in EPUB 3.3
  
    text element
  
    text alternatives for visual content
  
    this version of EPUB
  
    toc nav element
  
    top-level content documents
  
    under-implemented
  
    unique identifier
  
    values
  
    viewport
  
    viewport meta declarations
  
    visual rendering of XHTML content documents via CSS
  
    vocabulary association mechanisms
  
    XHTML content documents
  
    XHTML content documents
  
    xml:lang
  
        
      
        [EPUB-TTS-10] defines the following:
        
          
    EPUB 3 Text-to-Speech Support
  
        
      
        [HTML] defines the following:
        
          
    attribute processing model
  
    conversion to JSON
  
    cookies
  
    DOMContentLoaded event is triggered
  
    form element
  
    local storage
  
    Navigator interface
  
    navigator object
  
    object type
  
    origin
  
    style attribute (for html-global element)
  
    suggested default rendering
  
    top-level browsing contexts
  
    web storage
  
    WorkerNavigator interface
  
        
      
        [INFRA] defines the following:
        
          
    null
  
    string
  
    strip and collapse ASCII whitespace
  
        
      
        [MATHML3] defines the following:
        
          
    annotation-xml elements
  
    Content MathML
  
    input-compliant processor
  
    Presentation MathML
  
        
      
        [RDFA-CORE] defines the following:
        
          
    attribute processing model
  
        
      
        [URL] defines the following:
        
          
    base
  
    origin
  
    path-relative-scheme-less-URL string
  
    scheme
  
    url parser
  
    URL-fragment string
  
    URL-scheme string
  
    valid URL string
  
        
      
        [WEBIDL] defines the following:
        
          
    boolean type
  
    DOMString interface
  
    [Exposed] extended attribute
  
    [LegacyUnforgeable] extended attribute
  
    [SameObject] extended attribute
  
        
      
        [XML] defines the following:
        
          
    external
  
    external identifiers
  
    internal
  
    xml:lang attribute
  
        
      
  
  
		D. Change logThis section is non-normative.
			

			Note that this change log only identifies substantive changes since EPUB 3.2 — those that may affect the
				conformance of EPUB reading systems.

			For a list of all issues addressed, refer to the working group's issue tracker.

			
				Substantive changes since the Recommendation of 2023-05-25
				No substantive changes were made.
			

			
				Substantive changes since the Candidate Recommendation of 2022-05-12
				
					01-Feb-2023: Removed reference to getOverrideStyle in DOM Level 2 as it was dropped
						from the DOM Living Standard. See pull
							request 2531.
					11-Jan-2023: Added note advising reading system developers to support package metadata
						directionality even though marked as under-implemented for authoring. See pull request 2515.
					11-Jan-2023: Removed support description for under-implemented features. See pull request 2515.
					06-Jan-2023: Reduced the requirement to support prefixed CSS properties to a recommendation. See
							pull request 2514.
					06-Jan-2023: Reduced the requirement to use alternative text for non-text elements in the
						navigation document to a recommendation due to the lack of support for both. See pull request 2513.
					05-Jan-2023: Removed the processing requirements for linked records. See pull request 2512.
					11-Nov-2022: Added requirement to replace unsupported non-text elements with their text
						alternatives when generating non-HTML navigation widgets. See issue 2477.
					13-Oct-2022: Added sections to explain expectations for error handling and reporting. See issue 2454.
					11-Oct-2023: Additional text sketching the RS behavior in the case of erroneous ICB setting. See
							issue 2442.
					06-10-2022: Moved the restriction on XML external identifiers from the XML conformance clause to
						the security and privacy section, adding an additional note on security risks on internal or
						external entities. See issue 2433
						and issue 2477. 
					23-Sep-2023: Added a note on a possible future feature, whereby the value of
							rendition:flow would control the publication of webtoon-like publications. See
							issue 2412.
					19-Sept-2022: Removed ARIA extension section as the HTML specification already contains ARIA support
							requirements. See issue
						2431.
					14-Sept-2022: Integrated the reading system support requirements for unsupported features that
						were still in the EPUB 3.3 specification. See issue 2424.
					28-Aug-2022: The guidelines for rendering embedded timed media in Media Overlays have been
						deprecated. See issue 2397.
					28-July-2022: Restructured the vocabulary association mechanisms section as an algorithm for
						obtaining an expanded URL. See issue
							2378.
					22-July-2022: The name and version properties of the
							epubReadingSystem object have been deprecated. See issue 1872.
					19-July-2022: ZIP containers with content split into segments have been disallowed in general.
						See issue 2360. 
					24-June-2022: Removed duplicate requirement not to use hreflang value for
						processing purposes. See pull request
							2343.
					17-June-2022: Add recommendation to alert user before opening URLs with a scheme and clarify the
						external links section to account for more than just web schemes. See issue 2320.
					17-June-2022: Clarify support for the vocabulary association mechanisms is optional. See issue 2317.
					07-June-2022: The usage of File URLs has been disallowed. See issue 2324.
					07-June-2022: Noted that unsigned EPUB publications represent a security risk and added
						recommendation to treat sideloaded unsigned publications as untrusted. See issue 2265.
					07-June-2022: Updated privacy and security recommendations to use normative language.
					27-May-2022: Added reading system conformance section. See issue 2271.
					27-May-2022: Added recommendation to only load remote resources referenced via https. See issue 2263.
					20-May-2022: Removed the recommendation to prevent access to persistent storage from "unrelated
						documents". This recommendation conflicts with, and is made redundant by, the unique origin
						requirement introduced in this revision. See issue 2264.
					17-May-2022: Added an index of terms. See issue 2260.
				
			

			
				Substantive changes since EPUB
					3.2
				
					31-Mar-2022: Moved custom attribute authoring requirements to the authoring specification. Added
						reading system handling of custom properties. See issue 2134.
					17-Mar-2022: Added requirement to suppress playback of skippable elements in media overlays
						Documents. See issue 2066.
					11-Feb-2022: Fix the contradictory support statements for media overlays. Support is recommended
						when rendering of prerecorded audio is supported, as in previous versions of EPUB 3. See issue 1991.
					04-Feb-2022: Changed the non-normative security considerations for controlling network access,
						opening external links, and managing local storage to normative recommendations. See issue 1957.
					04-Feb-2022: Expanded the section on security and privacy to include new sections on the threat
						model for reading systems and additional recommendations for ensuring security and privacy. See
							issue 1871, issue 1872, issue 1875 and issue 1876.
					03-Feb-2022: Reduced the requirement to support deobfuscation to a recommendation. See issue 1873.
					19-Jan-2022: Elevated default statements for the rendition:spread and
							rendition:orientation properties to requirements, to align with
							rendition:layout. See issue 1936.
					08-Dec-2021: page-spread-center is now an alias for spread-none. See
							issue 1929.
					10-Nov-2021: Proper definition of the content URL and handling of relative URLs. See issue 1374 and issue 1888.
					01-Nov-2021: Added a statement on the reading system behavior when item references are repeated
						in the spine. See issue 1686.
					25-Oct-2021: Clarify that reading systems must render non-linear resources when they are
						hyperlinked to by a user. See issue
							1864.
					27-Aug-2021: Added accessibility bullet to cover the need for zooming, particularly for
						fixed-layout documents. See issue
							1776.
					27-Aug-2021: Remove the recommendation to support text search and selection in SVGs. Replacing
						with a more general bullet on search accessibility to avoid defining requirements on reading
						system UI. See issue 1774.
					09-July-2021: Restored the custom attributes section due to known usage but without reference to
						the attribute registry. See issue
							1602.
					09-July-2021: Removed recommendation to use the first language tag to determine an unspecified
						page progression direction. See issue
							1482.
					18-June-2021: Moved requirements for supporting SSML, PLS lexicons and CSS 3 Speech to the EPUB 3 Text-to-Speech Support note. See issue 1690.
					20-May-2021: Providing a shared and unique origin for scripts is a requirements for reading
						systems that support scripting. See issue 1659.
					20-May-2021: Removed requirement for reading systems to be conformant xml:base processors. See
							pull request 1678.
					12-May-2021: Added additional requirement that reading systems ignore property values that
						expand to invalid URL strings and property values with empty references. See issue 1673.
					12-May-2021: Changed all references to URIs/IRIs to URLs and references to RFCs 3986 and 3987 to
						the URL standard. See issue 808.

					06-May-2021: Recommend that reading systems support references to HTML target elements and SVG
						fragment identifiers in textref attributes and the text element's
							src attribute. Support for other fragment identifier schemes is optional. See
							issue 1586.
					23-Apr-2021: Clarified that reading systems should attempt to process invalid file and path
						names. See issue 1629
					16-Apr-2021: Removed the section on custom attributes. See Working Group Resolution.
					15-Apr-2021: Remove the reference to "presentation logic". See issue 1516 and Working Group Resolution.
					12-Apr-2021: The section B. epubReadingSystem object has been marked as "at-risk". See
							Working Group resolution.
					09-Apr-2021: Added a new section dedicated to accessibility and removed the outdated reference
						to the defunct appendix in the Accessibility specification. See issue 1608.
					09-Apr-2021: Added section clarifying all the conformance requirements on establishing the
						primary language and base direction of publication resources. See pull request 1613.
					01-Apr-2021: Added section clarifying how absolute URLs are created from relative in the package
						document. See pull request 1468.
					30-Mar-2021: Restructured the document to remove the rendundant conformance sections and
						requirements that were only used as locators when this specification was combined with the
						authoring requirements. See pull request
							1597 and pull request
						1609.
					23-Mar-2021: Added requirement to prevent top-level navigation to data URLs. See issue 1564.
					23-Mar-2021: Changed "suppressing" of non-linear content to "skipping" when traversing the spine
						to clarify that the intention is not to remove all access to such content. See issue 1480.
					10-Mar-2021: Changed restriction against using resources not listed in the package document to a
						recommendation not to use. See issue
							810.
					09-March-2021: the statement on unique identifiers has been set to non-normative, following the
						discussion and Working Group resolution. See issue 1310.
					08-Mar-2021: Remove unnecessary requirement to assume default value for rendering metadata. See
							issue 1313.
					05-Mar-2021: Added requirement for reading systems to collapse whitespace in DCMES and meta
						elements per the [infra] specification definition. See issue 1295.
					26-Feb-2021: Clarified the trimming of leading and trailing whitespace is to be done in
						accordance with the [infra] specification definition, and removed the exception that
							meta element properties may define their own whitespace handling rules. See issue 1295.
					19-Feb-2021: Updated the scripting security
							considerations so that the text recommends assigning a unique origin to each EPUB
						publication for security rather than domain isolation at the EPUB content document level. See issue 1156.
					15-Feb-2021: Clarified the requirements for presenting nav elements in the navigation document.
						The toc nav is now the only required element, the page-list nav is recommended when present, and
						all others are optional. See issue
							975.
					10-Feb-2021: A very first draft for 15. Security and privacy has been added.
					04-Feb-2021: Added explicit requirement that reading systems not use the language in
							dc:language elements as the language of resources.
					02-Feb-2021: Added base direction determination rules for the dir attribute
						accounting for the addition of the new auto value. See issue 1491.
					02-Feb-2021: Noted that language information in the new hreflang attribute on
							link elements is not authoritative. See issue 1488.
					24-Dec-2020: The creation of a release identifier [epubpackages-32] is no longer defined. See issue 1440.
					06-Nov-2020: Reading systems are now required to not resolve
							external identifiers in doctype declarations. See issue 1338.
					05-Nov-2020: Generalized the restriction on custom attribute namespace URIs to exclude all of
						idpf.org and w3.org. See issue
						1388.
					30-Sept-2020: The structure of the EPUB core specifications has been simplified to ease
						understanding and access to information. This specification now consolidates the reading system
						requirements from the EPUB 3.2 specification together with the Packages, Content Documents, OCF
						and media overlays specifications. The EPUB 3.3 core specification now focuses only on authoring
						requirements.
				
			
		
		E. AcknowledgementsThis section is non-normative.
    

    Specifications, like art, are human creations. No human has done more for EPUB than Garth Conboy, who has
		been there every step of the way, from the very first OEB 1.0 in 1999 to today's EPUB 3.3. None of this
		would have happened without Garth's vision, knowledge, and preternatural good nature. We dedicate EPUB 3.3 to his memory. 
        We are forever in your debt, Garth.

    The following members of the EPUB 3 Working Group contributed to the development of this specification:

    
                Shadi Abou-Zahra (Amazon)
        Will AWAD (Newgen Knowledgeworks)
        Noel Ray Barron (Apple Inc.)
        Sofia Bautista (Legible Media Inc.)
        Leah Brochu (National Network for Equitable Library Service)
        Matthew C. Chan (House of Anansi Press)
        Yu-Wei Chang (Taiwan Digital Publishing Forum)
        Juan Corona (Legible Media Inc.)
        Dave Cramer (W3C Invited Expert, chair)
        Romain Deltour (DAISY Consortium)
        Marisa DeMeglio (DAISY Consortium)
        Brady Duga (Google LLC)
        Reinaldo Ferraz (NIC.br - Brazilian Network Information Center)
        Symon Flaming (Rakuten Group, Inc.)
        John Foliot (W3C Invited Expert)
        Teenya Franklin (Pearson plc)
        Hadrien Gardeur (EDRLab)
        Matt Garrish (DAISY Consortium)
        Jen Goulden (Crawford Technologies)
        David Hall (Apple Inc.)
        Ivan Herman (W3C, staff contact)
        Tetsu Hoshino (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        jasen huang (ByteDance)
        Norikazu Ishizu (Kadokawa Corporation)
        Norihito IYENAGA (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Rick Johnson (VitalSource Technologies)
        Ken Jones (Circular Software)
        Antonio Kamiya (Dentsu Group Inc.)
        Deborah Kaplan (W3C Invited Expert)
        Bill Kasdorf (Book Industry Study Group)
        Hiroshi Kawada (MEDIA DO Co., Ltd.)
        George Kerscher (DAISY Consortium)
        Kazuhito Kidachi (Mitsue-Links Co., Ltd.)
        Masakazu Kitahara (Voyager Japan, Inc.)
        Toshiaki Koike (Voyager Japan, Inc.)
        Ryo Kuroda (ACCESS CO., LTD.)
        Charles LaPierre (Benetech)
        Dan Lazin (Google LLC)
        Philippe Le Hegaret (W3C)
        Laurent Le Meur (EDRLab)
        YuYu Lin (Taiwan Digital Publishing Forum)
        Farrah Little (National Network for Equitable Library Service)
        Victor Lopes (Apple Inc.)
        Karan  Malhotra (Newgen Knowledgeworks)
        Makoto Murata (DAISY Consortium)
        Cristina Mussinelli (Fondazione LIA)
        Yoichiro Nagao (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Theresa O'Connor (Apple Inc.)
        Yoshinori Ohmura (SHUEISHA Inc.)
        Rachel Osolen (National Network for Equitable Library Service)
        Gregorio Pellegrino (Fondazione LIA)
        Vijaya Gowri Perumal (Newgen Knowledgeworks)
        Wendy Reid (Rakuten Group, Inc., chair)
        John Roque (Apple Inc.)
        Leonard Rosenthol (Adobe)
        Shinobu Sato (Kadokawa Corporation)
        Ben Schroeter (Pearson plc)
        Daihei Shiohama (MEDIA DO Co., Ltd.)
        Tzviya Siegman (Wiley)
        Avneesh Singh (DAISY Consortium)
        MOTOI SUZUKI (SHUEISHA Inc.)
        Yutaka Suzuki (Kadokawa Corporation)
        Kyrce Swenson (Pearson plc)
        Shinya Takami (Kadokawa Corporation, chair)
        Mateus Teixeira (W. W. Norton & Company)
        Yukio Tomikura (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Aimee Ubbink (Crawford Technologies)
        xinyuan wang (ByteDance)
        Daniel Weck (DAISY Consortium)
        Fuqiao Xue (W3C)
        Evan Yamanishi (W. W. Norton & Company)
        Osamu Yoshiba (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Junichi Yoshii (Kodansha, Publishers, Ltd.)
        Naomi Yoshizawa (W3C)
        Laurence Zaysser (EDRLab)
    
    


	

F. ReferencesF.1 Normative references
    
    [bidi]
      Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm. Manish Goregaokar मनीष गोरेगांवकर; Robin Leroy.  Unicode Consortium. 2 September 2024. Unicode Standard Annex #9. URL: https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr9/tr9-50.html
    [css-fonts-4]
      CSS Fonts Module Level 4. Chris Lilley.  W3C. 1 February 2024. W3C Working Draft. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-4/
    [csssnapshot]
      CSS Snapshot. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS/
    [dcterms]
      DCMI Metadata Terms. DCMI Usage Board.  DCMI. 20 January 2020. DCMI Recommendation. URL: https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/dcmi-terms/
    [dom]
      DOM Standard. Anne van Kesteren.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/
    [epub-33]
      EPUB 3.3. Ivan Herman; Matt Garrish; Dave Cramer.  W3C. 25 May 2023. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-33/
    [epubcontentdocs-301]
      EPUB Content Documents 3.0.1. Markus Gylling; William McCoy; Elika J. Etimad; Matt Garrish.  IDPF. 26 June 2014. URL: https://idpf.org/epub/301/spec/epub-contentdocs-20140626.html
    [epubcontentdocs-32]
      EPUB Content Documents 3.2. Dave Cramer; Matt Garrish.  W3C. 08 May 2019. URL: https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub32/epub-contentdocs.html
    [epubmediaoverlays-32]
      EPUB Media Overlays 3.2. Marisa DeMeglio; Daniel Weck.  EPUB 3 Community Group. 08 May 2019. URL: https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub32/epub-mediaoverlays.html
    [html]
      HTML Standard. Anne van Kesteren; Domenic Denicola; Dominic Farolino; Ian Hickson; Philip Jägenstedt; Simon Pieters.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/
    [infra]
      Infra Standard. Anne van Kesteren; Domenic Denicola.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://infra.spec.whatwg.org/
    [mathml3]
      Mathematical Markup Language (MathML) Version 3.0 2nd Edition. David Carlisle; Patrick D F Ion; Robert R Miner.  W3C. 10 April 2014. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/MathML3/
    [opentype]
      OpenType specification.  Microsoft. URL: http://www.microsoft.com/typography/otspec/default.htm
    [rdfa-core]
      RDFa Core 1.1 - Third Edition. Ben Adida; Mark Birbeck; Shane McCarron; Ivan Herman et al.  W3C. 17 March 2015. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdfa-core/
    [rfc1951]
      DEFLATE Compressed Data Format Specification version 1.3. P. Deutsch.  IETF. May 1996. Informational. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1951
    [rfc2046]
      Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types. N. Freed; N. Borenstein.  IETF. November 1996. Draft Standard. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2046
    [RFC2119]
      Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels. S. Bradner.  IETF. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119
    [rfc2397]
      The "data" URL scheme. L. Masinter.  IETF. August 1998. Proposed Standard. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2397
    [rfc8089]
      The "file" URI Scheme. M. Kerwin.  IETF. February 2017. Proposed Standard. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8089
    [RFC8174]
      Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words. B. Leiba.  IETF. May 2017. Best Current Practice. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174
    [rfc9110]
      HTTP Semantics. R. Fielding, Ed.; M. Nottingham, Ed.; J. Reschke, Ed..  IETF. June 2022. Internet Standard. URL: https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc9110.html
    [svg]
      SVG.  W3C. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/SVG/
    [truetype]
      TrueType™ Reference Manual.  Apple, Inc. URL: https://developer.apple.com/fonts/TrueType-Reference-Manual/
    [url]
      URL Standard. Anne van Kesteren.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://url.spec.whatwg.org/
    [w3cprocess]
      W3C Process Document. URL: https://www.w3.org/Consortium/Process/
    [webidl]
      Web IDL Standard. Edgar Chen; Timothy Gu.  WHATWG. Living Standard. URL: https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/
    [woff]
      WOFF File Format 1.0. Jonathan Kew; Tal Leming; Erik van Blokland.  W3C. 13 December 2012. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/WOFF/
    [woff2]
      WOFF File Format 2.0. Vladimir Levantovsky.  W3C. 8 August 2024. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/WOFF2/
    [xml]
      Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition). Tim Bray; Jean Paoli; Michael Sperberg-McQueen; Eve Maler; François Yergeau et al.  W3C. 26 November 2008. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/xml/
    [xml-names]
      Namespaces in XML 1.0 (Third Edition). Tim Bray; Dave Hollander; Andrew Layman; Richard Tobin; Henry Thompson et al.  W3C. 8 December 2009. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names/
    [xmlenc-decrypt]
      Decryption Transform for XML Signature. Merlin Hughes; Takeshi Imamura; Hiroshi Maruyama.  W3C. 10 December 2002. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlenc-decrypt/
    [zip]
      .ZIP File Format Specification. 15 July 2020. Final. URL: https://pkware.cachefly.net/webdocs/casestudies/APPNOTE.TXT
    
  F.2 Informative references
    
    [css2]
      Cascading Style Sheets Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS 2.1) Specification. Bert Bos; Tantek Çelik; Ian Hickson; Håkon Wium Lie.  W3C. 7 June 2011. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS21/
    [epub-tts-10]
      EPUB 3 Text-to-Speech Enhancements 1.0. Matt Garrish.  W3C. 21 December 2023. W3C Working Group Note. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-tts-10/
    [epubpackages-32]
      EPUB Packages 3.2. Matt Garrish; Dave Cramer.  EPUB 3 Community Group. 08 May 2019. URL: https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub32/epub-packages.html
    [h264]
      H.264 : Advanced video coding for generic audiovisual services. 2017-04-13. URL: https://www.itu.int/ITU-T/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=13189
    [indexeddb]
      Indexed Database API. Nikunj Mehta; Jonas Sicking; Eliot Graff; Andrei Popescu; Jeremy Orlow; Joshua Bell.  W3C. 8 January 2015. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/IndexedDB/
    [rfc6386]
      VP8 Data Format and Decoding Guide. J. Bankoski; J. Koleszar; L. Quillio; J. Salonen; P. Wilkins; Y. Xu.  IETF. November 2011. Informational. URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6386
    [uaag20]
      User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) 2.0. James Allan; Greg Lowney; Kimberly Patch; Jeanne F Spellman.  W3C. 15 December 2015. W3C Working Group Note. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/UAAG20/
    [wai-aria-11]
      Accessible Rich Internet Applications (WAI-ARIA) 1.1. Joanmarie Diggs; Shane McCarron; Michael Cooper; Richard Schwerdtfeger; James Craig.  W3C. 14 December 2017. W3C Recommendation. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/
    
  
    ↑
  
      
      
        Permalink
        exported 
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property 
    
      § 8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions (2) 
    
      § 8.1.3 Viewport rendering (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 10. Processing structural semantics 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
        exported 
      
      Referenced in:
      
      Not referenced in this document.
    
    
      
      
        Permalink
        exported 
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
        exported IDL
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
        exported IDL
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.1 Base direction 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.1 Base direction 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.2 Rendering audio 
    
      § 9.3.3 Text-to-speech 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.1 Core Media types 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.1 Timing and synchronization 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.2 Rendering audio 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.2 Rendering audio 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.6 Collections 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
      § B.2 Description 
    
      § B.4.1.2 Features 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.1 Overview 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 10. Processing structural semantics (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.1.2 Content switching (deprecated) 
    
      § 6.1.1.3 The epub:trigger element (deprecated) 
    
      § 9.3.2 Embedded audio and video (deprecated) 
    
      § A. Unsupported features 
    
      § B.3 Properties 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization (2) 
    
      § 5.1 Base direction (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.3.3 Text-to-speech 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4. Open Container Format (OCF) processing 
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.2 Terminology 
    
      § 1.4.1 Relationship to HTML 
    
      § 3.9 External links 
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
      § 8.1.1.2 The rendition:orientation property 
    
      § 8.2.1 The rendition:flow property 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
      § 9.3.3 Text-to-speech 
    
      § 10. Processing structural semantics 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
      § 14. Accessibility 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6. EPUB content document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 2.3 Error reporting 
    
      § 4.1.2 File names 
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
      § 8.2.2 The rendition:align-x-center property 
    
      § 9.2.2 Rendering audio 
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
      § B.4.1.1 Description 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9. Media overlays processing 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.1 Overview 
    
      § 2.2 Error handling 
    
      § 2.3 Error reporting 
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory (2) 
    
      § 5.2 Unique identifier 
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
      § 8.2.1 The rendition:flow property 
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
      § 9.3.3 Text-to-speech 
    
      § 12. Backward compatibility 
    
      § 13. Forward compatibility 
    
      § 14. Accessibility 
    
      § 15.1 Overview 
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
      § 15.3 Recommendations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.1 Overview 
    
      § 1.2 Terminology 
    
      § 1.4.1 Relationship to HTML 
    
      § 1.4.2 Relationship to SVG 
    
      § 2.1 Requirements 
    
      § 3. Publication resource processing 
    
      § 3.6 XML processing 
    
      § 4. Open Container Format (OCF) processing 
    
      § 5. Package document processing 
    
      § 6.1 XHTML content documents 
    
      § 6.2 SVG content documents 
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
      § 8.1 Fixed-layout documents 
    
      § 8.2 Reflowable layouts 
    
      § 8.4 Custom properties 
    
      § 9. Media overlays processing 
    
      § 10. Processing structural semantics 
    
      § 11. Processing property values (2) 
    
      § 12. Backward compatibility 
    
      § 13. Forward compatibility 
    
      § 14. Accessibility 
    
      § 15.1 Overview 
    
      § A. Unsupported features 
    
      § B. epubReadingSystem object 
    
      § D. Change log 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
      § 9.4.1 Skippability 
    
      § 9.4.2 Escapability 
    
      § 10. Processing structural semantics 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.4.2 Escapability 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.2 File names 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 2.3 Error reporting 
    
      § 8.1.3 Viewport rendering 
    
      § 8.3 The viewport meta tag 
    
      § 14. Accessibility 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
      § 8.1 Fixed-layout documents 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.3 Font obfuscation 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.2 Foreign resources 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.2 Foreign resources 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5.1 Spine overrides 
    
      § 8.4 Custom properties 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.1 Core Media types 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9. Media overlays processing 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 2.1 Requirements 
    
      § 5.5.1 Spine overrides 
    
      § 8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property 
    
      § 8.2.1 The rendition:flow property 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5.1 Spine overrides 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.7 Legacy features 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.9 External links 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.2.1 The rendition:flow property 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.4 Manifest (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9. Media overlays processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9. Media overlays processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata (2) 
    
      § 8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property 
    
      § 8.1.1.2 The rendition:orientation property 
    
      § 8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property 
    
      § 11. Processing property values (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
      § 4.2 OCF ZIP container 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.2 OCF ZIP container 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 2.1 Requirements 
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization (2) 
    
      § 3.9 External links 
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
      § 12. Backward compatibility 
    
      § 13. Forward compatibility 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5. Package document processing 
    
      § 15.2 Threat model 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property 
    
      § 8.1.1.2 The rendition:orientation property 
    
      § 8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property 
    
      § 8.2.1 The rendition:flow property 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
      § 8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.1 Timing and synchronization 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5 Spine (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6. EPUB content document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
      § 5.5.1 Spine overrides 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3. Publication resource processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization (2) 
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.2 Reflowable layouts 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3 Resource locations 
    
      § 15.2 Threat model (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.2 The rendition:orientation property 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.3 Resource locations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
      § 4.2 OCF ZIP container 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.8 Network access 
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
      § B.2 Description 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.1 Overview 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.1 Timing and synchronization 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.3 META-INF directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
      § 5.5.1 Spine overrides 
    
      § 8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting (2) 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
      § B.4.1.2 Features (2) (3) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 10. Processing structural semantics 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
      § 6.1.2.3.1 Embedded SVG and CSS 
    
      § 8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.2 SVG content documents 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.2 Terminology 
    
      § 8.1.1.1 The rendition:layout property 
    
      § 8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property 
    
      § 8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.2 Terminology 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
      § 9.3.3 Text-to-speech 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 14. Accessibility 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.7 Legacy features 
    
      § 12. Backward compatibility 
    
      § 13. Forward compatibility 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 7. Navigation document processing 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4 Data URLs 
    
      § 5.4 Manifest 
    
      § B.4.1.2 Features 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.1 Base direction 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.2 Unique identifier 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 1.2 Terminology 
    
      § 2.1 Requirements 
    
      § 3.1 Core Media types 
    
      § 6.1.2.2 MathML 
    
      § 6.2 SVG content documents 
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
      § 8.1.1.3 The rendition:spread property 
    
      § 8.1.3 Viewport rendering 
    
      § 8.2.2 The rendition:align-x-center property 
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 8.3 The viewport meta tag 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
      § 5.5 Spine 
    
      § 6.1.2.2 MathML 
    
      § 6.1.2.3 Embedded SVG 
    
      § 6.1.2.3.1 Embedded SVG and CSS 
    
      § 8.1.1.4 The rendition:page-spread-* properties 
    
      § 8.1.2 Initial containing block dimensions 
    
      § 8.2.1 The rendition:flow property 
    
      § 9.1 Loading the media overlay 
    
      § 9.3.1 Navigation 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1 XHTML content documents 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.3.3 Text-to-speech 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.1 Microdata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.1 Microdata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4.1 Local storage 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.2 Description 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.4 Form submission 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4.1 Local storage 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4 Scripting 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.3.1 Embedded SVG and CSS 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
      § 6.4 Scripting (2) 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.3 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.4 Data URLs 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.4.1 Local storage 
    
      § 6.4.3 Security considerations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values (2) (3) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 5.3 Metadata 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.2 MathML 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.2 MathML 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.2 MathML 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.2.2 MathML 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 6.1.1.1 RDFa 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory (2) (3) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.9 External links 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 4.1.1 URL of the root directory (2) 
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 9.2.3 Rendering EPUB content document elements 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 11. Processing property values 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition (2) 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § B.1 Interface definition 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.3 Recommendations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.3 Recommendations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 15.3 Recommendations 
    
  
    
      
      
        Permalink
         
      
      Referenced in:
      
    
      § 3.7 Internationalization 
    
  
    